He alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted , sleeping castle . 
But though externally all remained as of old , the inner relations of all these people had changed since Prince Andrew had seen them last . 
The household was divided into two alien and hostile camps , who changed their habits for his sake and only met because he was there . 
To the one camp belonged the old prince , Madmoiselle Bourienne , and the architect ; to the other Princess Mary , Dessalles , little Nicholas , and all the old nurses and maids . 
During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together , but they were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor for whose sake an exception was being made and that his presence made them all feel awkward . 
Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the first day , he was taciturn , and the old prince noticing this also became morosely dumb and retired to his apartments directly after dinner . 
In the evening , when Prince Andrew went to him and , trying to rouse him , began to tell him of the young Count Kamensky 's campaign , the old prince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary , blaming her for her superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne , who , he said , was the only person really attached to him . 
The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because of Princess Mary : that she purposely worried and irritated him , and that by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Prince Nicholas . 
The old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughter and that her life was very hard , but he also knew that he could not help tormenting her and that she deserved it . 
`` Why does Prince Andrew , who sees this , say nothing to me about his sister ? 
Does he think me a scoundrel , or an old fool who , without any reason , keeps his own daughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself ? 
He does n't understand , so I must explain it , and he must hear me out , '' thought the old prince . 
And he began explaining why he could not put up with his daughter 's unreasonable character . 
`` If you ask me , '' said Prince Andrew , without looking up -LRB- he was censuring his father for the first time in his life -RRB- , `` I did not wish to speak about it , but as you ask me I will give you my frank opinion . 
If there is any misunderstanding and discord between you and Mary , I ca n't blame her for it at all . 
I know how she loves and respects you . 
Since you ask me , '' continued Prince Andrew , becoming irritable -- as he was always liable to do of late -- `` I can only say that if there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthless woman , who is not fit to be my sister 's companion . '' 
The old man at first stared fixedly at his son , and an unnatural smile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrew could not get accustomed . 
`` What companion , my dear boy ? 
Eh ? 
You 've already been talking it over ! 
Eh ? '' 
`` Father , I did not want to judge , '' said Prince Andrew , in a hard and bitter tone , `` but you challenged me , and I have said , and always shall say , that Mary is not to blame , but those to blame -- the one to blame -- is that Frenchwoman . '' 
`` Ah , he has passed judgment ... passed judgement ! '' 
said the old man in a low voice and , as it seemed to Prince Andrew , with some embarrassment , but then he suddenly jumped up and cried : `` Be off , be off ! 
Let not a trace of you remain here ! 
... '' Prince Andrew wished to leave at once , but Princess Mary persuaded him to stay another day . 
That day he did not see his father , who did not leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bourienne and Tikhon , but asked several times whether his son had gone . 
Next day , before leaving , Prince Andrew went to his son 's rooms . 
The boy , curly-headed like his mother and glowing with health , sat on his knee , and Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard , but fell into a reverie without finishing the story . 
He thought not of this pretty child , his son whom he held on his knee , but of himself . 
He sought in himself either remorse for having angered his father or regret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad terms with him , and was horrified to find neither . 
What meant still more to him was that he sought and did not find in himself the former tenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing the boy and taking him on his knee . 
`` Well , go on ! '' 
said his son . 
Prince Andrew , without replying , put him down from his knee and went out of the room . 
As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations , and especially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which he had been happy , weariness of life overcame him with its former intensity , and he hastened to escape from these memories and to find some work as soon as possible . 
`` So you 've decided to go , Andrew ? '' 
asked his sister . 
`` Thank God that I can , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` I am very sorry you ca n't . '' 
`` Why do you say that ? '' 
replied Princess Mary . 
`` Why do you say that , when you are going to this terrible war , and he is so old ? 
Mademoiselle Bourienne says he has been asking about you ... '' As soon as she began to speak of that , her lips trembled and her tears began to fall . 
Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing the room . 
`` Ah , my God ! 
my God ! 
When one thinks who and what -- what trash -- can cause people misery ! '' 
he said with a malignity that alarmed Princess Mary . 
She understood that when speaking of `` trash '' he referred not only to Mademoiselle Bourienne , the cause of her misery , but also to the man who had ruined his own happiness . 
`` Andrew ! 
One thing I beg , I entreat of you ! '' 
she said , touching his elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears . 
`` I understand you '' -LRB- she looked down -RRB- . 
`` Do n't imagine that sorrow is the work of men . 
Men are His tools . '' 
She looked a little above Prince Andrew 's head with the confident , accustomed look with which one looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs . 
`` Sorrow is sent by Him , not by men . 
Men are His instruments , they are not to blame . 
If you think someone has wronged you , forget it and forgive ! 
We have no right to punish . 
And then you will know the happiness of forgiving . '' 
`` If I were a woman I would do so , Mary . 
That is a woman 's virtue . 
But a man should not and can not forgive and forget , '' he replied , and though till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin , all his unexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart . 
`` If Mary is already persuading me forgive , it means that I ought long ago to have punished him , '' he thought . 
And giving her no further reply , he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when he would meet Kuragin who he knew was now in the army . 
Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more , saying that she knew how unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without being reconciled to him , but Prince Andrew replied that he would probably soon be back again from the army and would certainly write to his father , but that the longer he stayed now the more embittered their differences would become . 
`` Good-by , Andrew ! 
Remember that misfortunes come from God , and men are never to blame , '' were the last words he heard from his sister when he took leave of her . 
`` Then it must be so ! '' 
thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of the avenue from the house at Bald Hills . 
`` She , poor innocent creature , is left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits . 
The old man feels he is guilty , but can not change himself . 
My boy is growing up and rejoices in life , in which like everybody else he will deceive or be deceived . 
And I am off to the army . 
Why ? 
I myself do n't know . 
I want to meet that man whom I despise , so as to give him a chance to kill and laugh at me ! '' 
These conditions of life had been the same before , but then they were all connected , while now they had all tumbled to pieces . 
Only senseless things , lacking coherence , presented themselves one after another to Prince Andrew 's mind . 
Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at the end of June . 
The first army , with which was the Emperor , occupied the fortified camp at Drissa ; the second army was retreating , trying to effect a junction with the first one from which it was said to be cut off by large French forces . 
Everyone was dissatisfied with the general course of affairs in the Russian army , but no one anticipated any danger of invasion of the Russian provinces , and no one thought the war would extend farther than the western , the Polish , provinces . 
Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly , to whom he had been assigned , on the bank of the Drissa . 
As there was not a single town or large village in the vicinity of the camp , the immense number of generals and courtiers accompanying the army were living in the best houses of the villages on both sides of the river , over a radius of six miles . 
Barclay de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles from the Emperor . 
He received Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told him in his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor for a decision as to his employment , but asked him meanwhile to remain on his staff . 
Anatole Kuragin , whom Prince Andrew had hoped to find with the army , was not there . 
He had gone to Petersburg , but Prince Andrew was glad to hear this . 
His mind was occupied by the interests of the center that was conducting a gigantic war , and he was glad to be free for a while from the distraction caused by the thought of Kuragin . 
During the first four days , while no duties were required of him , Prince Andrew rode round the whole fortified camp and , by the aid of his own knowledge and by talks with experts , tried to form a definite opinion about it . 
But the question whether the camp was advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him undecided . 
Already from his military experience and what he had seen in the Austrian campaign , he had come to the conclusion that in war the most deeply considered plans have no significance and that all depends on the way unexpected movements of the enemy -- that can not be foreseen - are met , and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled . 
To clear up this last point for himself , Prince Andrew , utilizing his position and acquaintances , tried to fathom the character of the control of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it , and he deduced for himself the following of the state of affairs . 
While the Emperor had still been at Vilna , the forces had been divided into three armies . 
First , the army under Barclay de Tolly , secondly , the army under Bagration , and thirdly , the one commanded by Tormasov . 
The Emperor was with the first army , but not as commander in chief . 
In the orders issued it was stated , not that the Emperor would take command , but only that he would be with the army . 
