Ermolov had been to see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him to use his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to take the offensive . 
`` If I did not know you I should think you did not want what you are asking for . 
I need only advise anything and his Highness is sure to do the opposite , '' replied Bennigsen . 
The Cossack 's report , confirmed by horse patrols who were sent out , was the final proof that events had matured . 
The tightly coiled spring was released , the clock began to whirr and the chimes to play . 
Despite all his supposed power , his intellect , his experience , and his knowledge of men , Kutuzov -- having taken into consideration the Cossack 's report , a note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports to the Emperor , the wishes he supposed the Emperor to hold , and the fact that all the generals expressed the same wish -- could no longer check the inevitable movement , and gave the order to do what he regarded as useless and harmful -- gave his approval , that is , to the accomplished fact . 
Bennigsen 's note and the Cossack 's information that the left flank of the French was unguarded were merely final indications that it was necessary to order an attack , and it was fixed for the fifth of October . 
On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed the dispositions . 
Toll read them to Ermolov , asking him to attend to the further arrangements . 
`` All right -- all right . 
I have n't time just now , '' replied Ermolov , and left the hut . 
The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good . 
As in the Austerlitz dispositions , it was written -- though not in German this time : `` The First Column will march here and here , '' `` the Second Column will march there and there , '' and so on ; and on paper , all these columns arrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy . 
Everything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions , and as is always the case , not a single column reached its place at the appointed time . 
When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had been prepared , an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them to Ermolov to deal with . 
A young officer of the Horse Guards , Kutuzov 's orderly , pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him , went to Ermolov 's quarters . 
`` Gone away , '' said Ermolov 's orderly . 
The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whom Ermolov was often to be found . 
`` No , and the general 's out too . '' 
The officer , mounting his horse , rode off to someone else . 
`` No , he 's gone out . '' 
`` If only they do n't make me responsible for this delay ! 
What a nuisance it is ! '' 
thought the officer , and he rode round the whole camp . 
One man said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some other generals , others said he must have returned home . 
The officer searched till six o'clock in the evening without even stopping to eat . 
Ermolov was nowhere to be found and no one knew where he was . 
The officer snatched a little food at a comrade 's , and rode again to the vanguard to find Miloradovich . 
Miloradovich too was away , but here he was told that he had gone to a ball at General Kikin 's and that Ermolov was probably there too . 
`` But where is it ? '' 
`` Why , there , over at Echkino , '' said a Cossack officer , pointing to a country house in the far distance . 
`` What , outside our line ? '' 
`` They 've put two regiments as outposts , and they 're having such a spree there , it 's awful ! 
Two bands and three sets of singers ! '' 
The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino . 
While still at a distance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier 's dance song proceeding from the house . 
`` In the meadows ... in the meadows ! '' 
he heard , accompanied by whistling and the sound of a torban , drowned every now and then by shouts . 
These sounds made his spirits rise , but at the same time he was afraid that he would be blamed for not having executed sooner the important order entrusted to him . 
It was already past eight o'clock . 
He dismounted and went up into the porch of a large country house which had remained intact between the Russian and French forces . 
In the refreshment room and the hall , footmen were bustling about with wine and viands . 
Groups of singers stood outside the windows . 
The officer was admitted and immediately saw all the chief generals of the army together , and among them Ermolov 's big imposing figure . 
They all had their coats unbuttoned and were standing in a semicircle with flushed and animated faces , laughing loudly . 
In the middle of the room a short handsome general with a red face was dancing the trepak with much spirit and agility . 
`` Ha , ha , ha ! 
Bravo , Nicholas Ivanych ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such a moment he was doubly to blame , and he would have preferred to wait ; but one of the generals espied him and , hearing what he had come about , informed Ermolov . 
Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and , hearing what the officer had to say , took the papers from him without a word . 
`` You think he went off just by chance ? '' 
said a comrade , who was on the staff that evening , to the officer of the Horse Guards , referring to Ermolov . 
`` It was a trick . 
It was done on purpose to get Konovnitsyn into trouble . 
You 'll see what a mess there 'll be tomorrow . '' 
Next day the decrepit Kutuzov , having given orders to be called early , said his prayers , dressed , and , with an unpleasant consciousness of having to direct a battle he did not approve of , got into his caleche and drove from Letashovka -LRB- a village three and a half miles from Tarutino -RRB- to the place where the attacking columns were to meet . 
He sat in the caleche , dozing and waking up by turns , and listening for any sound of firing on the right as an indication that the action had begun . 
But all was still quiet . 
A damp dull autumn morning was just dawning . 
On approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticed cavalrymen leading their horses to water across the road along which he was driving . 
Kutuzov looked at them searchingly , stopped his carriage , and inquired what regiment they belonged to . 
They belonged to a column that should have been far in front and in ambush long before then . 
`` It may be a mistake , '' thought the old commander in chief . 
But a little further on he saw infantry regiments with their arms piled and the soldiers , only partly dressed , eating their rye porridge and carrying fuel . 
He sent for an officer . 
The officer reported that no order to advance had been received . 
`` How ! 
Not rec ... '' Kutuzov began , but checked himself immediately and sent for a senior officer . 
Getting out of his caleche , he waited with drooping head and breathing heavily , pacing silently up and down . 
When Eykhen , the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned , appeared , Kutuzov went purple in the face , not because that officer was to blame for the mistake , but because he was an object of sufficient importance for him to vent his wrath on . 
Trembling and panting the old man fell into that state of fury in which he sometimes used to roll on the ground , and he fell upon Eykhen , threatening him with his hands , shouting and loading him with gross abuse . 
Another man , Captain Brozin , who happened to turn up and who was not at all to blame , suffered the same fate . 
`` What sort of another blackguard are you ? 
I 'll have you shot ! 
Scoundrels ! '' 
yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice , waving his arms and reeling . 
He was suffering physically . 
He , the commander in chief , a Serene Highness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had ever had in Russia , to be placed in this position -- made the laughingstock of the whole army ! 
`` I need n't have been in such a hurry to pray about today , or have kept awake thinking everything over all night , '' thought he to himself . 
`` When I was a chit of an officer no one would have dared to mock me so ... and now ! '' 
He was in a state of physical suffering as if from corporal punishment , and could not avoid expressing it by cries of anger and distress . 
But his strength soon began to fail him , and looking about him , conscious of having said much that was amiss , he again got into his caleche and drove back in silence . 
His wrath , once expended , did not return , and blinking feebly he listened to excuses and self-justifications -LRB- Ermolov did not come to see him till the next day -RRB- and to the insistence of Bennigsen , Konovnitsyn , and Toll that the movement that had miscarried should be executed next day . 
And once more Kutuzov had to consent . 
Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in the evening and advanced during the night . 
It was an autumn night with dark purple clouds , but no rain . 
The ground was damp but not muddy , and the troops advanced noiselessly , only occasionally a jingling of the artillery could be faintly heard . 
The men were forbidden to talk out loud , to smoke their pipes , or to strike a light , and they tried to prevent their horses neighing . 
The secrecy of the undertaking heightened its charm and they marched gaily . 
Some columns , supposing they had reached their destination , halted , piled arms , and settled down on the cold ground , but the majority marched all night and arrived at places where they evidently should not have been . 
Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks -LRB- the least important detachment of all -RRB- got to his appointed place at the right time . 
This detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest , on the path leading from the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk . 
Toward dawn , Count Orlov-Denisov , who had dozed off , was awakened by a deserter from the French army being brought to him . 
This was a Polish sergeant of Poniatowski 's corps , who explained in Polish that he had come over because he had been slighted in the service : that he ought long ago to have been made an officer , that he was braver than any of them , and so he had left them and wished to pay them out . 
He said that Murat was spending the night less than a mile from where they were , and that if they would let him have a convoy of a hundred men he would capture him alive . 
Count Orlov-Denisov consulted his fellow officers . 
The offer was too tempting to be refused . 
Everyone volunteered to go and everybody advised making the attempt . 
After much disputing and arguing , Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to go with the Polish sergeant . 
