Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed . 
Next day he woke calm and cheerful . 
But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov 's and Denisov 's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfully showed them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimental commander in which inquiries were made about yesterday 's occurrence . 
The adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very bad turn : that a court-martial had been appointed , and that in view of the severity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded , degradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for . 
The case , as represented by the offended parties , was that , after seizing the transports , Major Denisov , being drunk , went to the chief quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief , threatened to strike him , and on being led out had rushed into the office and given two officials a thrashing , and dislocated the arm of one of them . 
In answer to Rostov 's renewed questions , Denisov said , laughing , that he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixed up in it , but that it was all nonsense and rubbish , and he did not in the least fear any kind of trial , and that if those scoundrels dared attack him he would give them an answer that they would not easily forget . 
Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter , but Rostov knew him too well not to detect that -LRB- while hiding it from others -RRB- at heart he feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair , which was evidently taking a bad turn . 
Every day , letters of inquiry and notices from the court arrived , and on the first of May , Denisov was ordered to hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear before the staff of his division to explain his violence at the commissariat office . 
On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with two Cossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars . 
Denisov , as was his wont , rode out in front of the outposts , parading his courage . 
A bullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part of his leg . 
Perhaps at another time Denisov would not have left the regiment for so slight a wound , but now he took advantage of it to excuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital . 
In June the battle of Friedland was fought , in which the Pavlograds did not take part , and after that an armistice was proclaimed . 
Rostov , who felt his friend 's absence very much , having no news of him since he left and feeling very anxious about his wound and the progress of his affairs , took advantage of the armistice to get leave to visit Denisov in hospital . 
The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twice devastated by Russian and French troops . 
Because it was summer , when it is so beautiful out in the fields , the little town presented a particularly dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences , its foul streets , tattered inhabitants , and the sick and drunken soldiers wandering about . 
The hospital was in a brick building with some of the window frames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of a wooden fence that had been pulled to pieces . 
Several bandaged soldiers , with pale swollen faces , were sitting or walking about in the sunshine in the yard . 
Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell of putrefaction and hospital air . 
On the stairs he met a Russian army doctor smoking a cigar . 
The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant . 
`` I ca n't tear myself to pieces , '' the doctor was saying . 
`` Come to Makar Alexeevich in the evening . 
I shall be there . '' 
The assistant asked some further questions . 
`` Oh , do the best you can ! 
Is n't it all the same ? '' 
The doctor noticed Rostov coming upstairs . 
`` What do you want , sir ? '' 
said the doctor . 
`` What do you want ? 
The bullets having spared you , do you want to try typhus ? 
This is a pesthouse , sir . '' 
`` How so ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Typhus , sir . 
It 's death to go in . 
Only we two , Makeev and I '' -LRB- he pointed to the assistant -RRB- , `` keep on here . 
Some five of us doctors have died in this place ... . 
When a new one comes he is done for in a week , '' said the doctor with evident satisfaction . 
`` Prussian doctors have been invited here , but our allies do n't like it at all . '' 
Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars , who was wounded . 
`` I do n't know . 
I ca n't tell you , sir . 
Only think ! 
I am alone in charge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients ! 
It 's well that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds of coffee and some lint each month or we should be lost ! '' 
he laughed . 
`` Four hundred , sir , and they 're always sending me fresh ones . 
There are four hundred ? 
Eh ? '' 
he asked , turning to the assistant . 
The assistant looked fagged out . 
He was evidently vexed and impatient for the talkative doctor to go . 
`` Major Denisov , '' Rostov said again . 
`` He was wounded at Molliten . '' 
`` Dead , I fancy . 
Eh , Makeev ? '' 
queried the doctor , in a tone of indifference . 
The assistant , however , did not confirm the doctor 's words . 
`` Is he tall and with reddish hair ? '' 
asked the doctor . 
Rostov described Denisov 's appearance . 
`` There was one like that , '' said the doctor , as if pleased . 
`` That one is dead , I fancy . 
However , I 'll look up our list . 
We had a list . 
Have you got it , Makeev ? '' 
`` Makar Alexeevich has the list , '' answered the assistant . 
`` But if you 'll step into the officers ' wards you 'll see for yourself , '' he added , turning to Rostov . 
`` Ah , you 'd better not go , sir , '' said the doctor , `` or you may have to stay here yourself . '' 
But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked the assistant to show him the way . 
`` Only do n't blame me ! '' 
the doctor shouted up after him . 
Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor . 
The smell was so strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause and collect his strength before he could go on . 
A door opened to the right , and an emaciated sallow man on crutches , barefoot and in underclothing , limped out and , leaning against the doorpost , looked with glittering envious eyes at those who were passing . 
Glancing in at the door , Rostov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floor on straw and overcoats . 
`` May I go in and look ? '' 
`` What is there to see ? '' 
said the assistant . 
But , just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in , Rostov entered the soldiers ' ward . 
The foul air , to which he had already begun to get used in the corridor , was still stronger here . 
It was a little different , more pungent , and one felt that this was where it originated . 
In the long room , brightly lit up by the sun through the large windows , the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads to the walls , and leaving a passage in the middle . 
Most of them were unconscious and paid no attention to the newcomers . 
Those who were conscious raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces , and all looked intently at Rostov with the same expression of hope , of relief , reproach , and envy of another 's health . 
Rostov went to the middle of the room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoining rooms saw the same thing there . 
He stood still , looking silently around . 
He had not at all expected such a sight . 
Just before him , almost across the middle of the passage on the bare floor , lay a sick man , probably a Cossack to judge by the cut of his hair . 
The man lay on his back , his huge arms and legs outstretched . 
His face was purple , his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were seen , and on his bare legs and arms which were still red , the veins stood out like cords . 
He was knocking the back of his head against the floor , hoarsely uttering some word which he kept repeating . 
Rostov listened and made out the word . 
It was `` drink , drink , a drink ! '' 
Rostov glanced round , looking for someone who would put this man back in his place and bring him water . 
`` Who looks after the sick here ? '' 
he asked the assistant . 
Just then a commissariat soldier , a hospital orderly , came in from the next room , marching stiffly , and drew up in front of Rostov . 
