`` It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I. . . '' 
she began , but Hippolyte interrupted her with the words : `` Le Roi de Prusse ... '' and again , as soon as all turned toward him , excused himself and said no more . 
Anna Pavlovna frowned . 
Mortemart , Hippolyte 's friend , addressed him firmly . 
`` Come now , what about your Roi de Prusse ? '' 
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing . 
`` Oh , it 's nothing . 
I only wished to say ... '' -LRB- he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to get in -RRB- `` I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de Prusse ! '' 
Boris smiled circumspectly , so that it might be taken as ironical or appreciative according to the way the joke was received . 
Everybody laughed . 
`` Your joke is too bad , it 's witty but unjust , '' said Anna Pavlovna , shaking her little shriveled finger at him . 
`` We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse , but for right principles . 
Oh , that wicked Prince Hippolyte ! '' 
she said . 
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the political news . 
It became particularly animated toward the end of the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned . 
`` You know N -- N -- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year ? '' 
said `` the man of profound intellect . '' 
`` Why should n't S -- S -- get the same distinction ? '' 
`` Pardon me ! 
A snuffbox with the Emperor 's portrait is a reward but not a distinction , '' said the diplomatist -- `` a gift , rather . '' 
`` There are precedents , I may mention Schwarzenberg . '' 
`` It 's impossible , '' replied another . 
`` Will you bet ? 
The ribbon of the order is a different matter ... '' When everybody rose to go , Helene who had spoken very little all the evening again turned to Boris , asking him in a tone of caressing significant command to come to her on Tuesday . 
`` It is of great importance to me , '' she said , turning with a smile toward Anna Pavlovna , and Anna Pavlovna , with the same sad smile with which she spoke of her exalted patroness , supported Helene 's wish . 
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the Prussian army , Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him . 
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on Tuesday . 
But on Tuesday evening , having come to Helene 's splendid salon , Boris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to come . 
There were other guests and the countess talked little to him , and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a whisper , with a strangely unsmiling face : `` Come to dinner tomorrow ... in the evening . 
You must come ... . 
Come ! '' 
During that stay in Petersburg , Boris became an intimate in the countess ' house . 
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier . 
Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte , `` the enemy of mankind . '' 
Militiamen and recruits were being enrolled in the villages , and from the seat of war came contradictory news , false as usual and therefore variously interpreted . 
The life of old Prince Bolkonski , Prince Andrew , and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805 . 
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia . 
Despite the weakness of age , which had become particularly noticeable since the time when he thought his son had been killed , he did not think it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor himself , and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy and strength . 
He was continually traveling through the three provinces entrusted to him , was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties , severe to cruelty with his subordinates , and went into everything down to the minutest details himself . 
Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her father , and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- . 
The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess ' rooms and Princess Mary spent most of the day in the nursery , taking a mother 's place to her little nephew as best she could . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , too , seemed passionately fond of the boy , and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel -- as she called her nephew -- and playing with him . 
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the tomb of the little princess , and in this chapel was a marble monument brought from Italy , representing an angel with outspread wings ready to fly upwards . 
The angel 's upper lip was slightly raised as though about to smile , and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel 's face reminded them strangely of the little princess . 
But what was still stranger , though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister , was that in the expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel 's face , Prince Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead wife : `` Ah , why have you done this to me ? '' 
Soon after Prince Andrew 's return the old prince made over to him a large estate , Bogucharovo , about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills . 
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills , partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with his father 's peculiarities , and partly because he needed solitude , Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo , began building and spent most of his time there . 
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to continue his military service , and when the war recommenced and everybody had to serve , he took a post under his father in the recruitment so as to avoid active service . 
The old prince and his son seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805 . 
The old man , roused by activity , expected the best results from the new campaign , while Prince Andrew on the contrary , taking no part in the war and secretly regretting this , saw only the dark side . 
On February 26 , 1807 , the old prince set off on one of his circuits . 
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father 's absence . 
Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days . 
The coachman who had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrew . 
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the letters to Princess Mary 's apartments , but did not find him there . 
He was told that the prince had gone to the nursery . 
`` If you please , your excellency , Petrusha has brought some papers , '' said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child 's little chair while , frowning and with trembling hands , he poured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he said crossly , and , his hand shaking unintentionally , he poured too many drops into the glass . 
He threw the mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water . 
The maid brought it . 
There were in the room a child 's cot , two boxes , two armchairs , a table , a child 's table , and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was sitting . 
The curtains were drawn , and a single candle was burning on the table , screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on the cot . 
`` My dear , '' said Princess Mary , addressing her brother from beside the cot where she was standing , `` better wait a bit ... later ... '' `` Oh , leave off , you always talk nonsense and keep putting things off -- and this is what comes of it ! '' 
said Prince Andrew in an exasperated whisper , evidently meaning to wound his sister . 
`` My dear , really ... it 's better not to wake him ... he 's asleep , '' said the princess in a tone of entreaty . 
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed , wineglass in hand . 
`` Perhaps we 'd really better not wake him , '' he said hesitating . 
`` As you please ... really ... I think so ... but as you please , '' said Princess Mary , evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had prevailed . 
She drew her brother 's attention to the maid who was calling him in a whisper . 
It was the second night that neither of them had slept , watching the boy who was in a high fever . 
These last days , mistrusting their household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town , they had been trying first one remedy and then another . 
Worn out by sleeplessness and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and reproached and disputed with each other . 
`` Petrusha has come with papers from your father , '' whispered the maid . 
Prince Andrew went out . 
`` Devil take them ! '' 
he muttered , and after listening to the verbal instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his father 's letter , he returned to the nursery . 
`` Well ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Still the same . 
Wait , for heaven 's sake . 
Karl Ivanich always says that sleep is more important than anything , '' whispered Princess Mary with a sigh . 
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him . 
He was burning hot . 
`` Confound you and your Karl Ivanich ! '' 
He took the glass with the drops and again went up to the cot . 
`` Andrew , do n't ! '' 
said Princess Mary . 
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes , and stooped glass in hand over the infant . 
`` But I wish it , '' he said . 
`` I beg you -- give it him ! '' 
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively and calling the nurse began giving the medicine . 
The child screamed hoarsely . 
Prince Andrew winced and , clutching his head , went out and sat down on a sofa in the next room . 
He still had all the letters in his hand . 
Opening them mechanically he began reading . 
The old prince , now and then using abbreviations , wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows : Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news -- if it 's not false . 
Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory over Buonaparte at Eylau . 
In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing , and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable . 
