`` Good day , your honor ! '' 
he shouted , rolling his eyes at Rostov and evidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities . 
`` Get him to his place and give him some water , '' said Rostov , pointing to the Cossack . 
`` Yes , your honor , '' the soldier replied complacently , and rolling his eyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter , but did not move . 
`` No , it 's impossible to do anything here , '' thought Rostov , lowering his eyes , and he was going out , but became aware of an intense look fixed on him on his right , and he turned . 
Close to the corner , on an overcoat , sat an old , unshaven , gray-bearded soldier as thin as a skeleton , with a stern sallow face and eyes intently fixed on Rostov . 
The man 's neighbor on one side whispered something to him , pointing at Rostov , who noticed that the old man wanted to speak to him . 
He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one leg bent under him , the other had been amputated above the knee . 
His neighbor on the other side , who lay motionless some distance from him with his head thrown back , was a young soldier with a snub nose . 
His pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolled back . 
Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down his back . 
`` Why , this one seems ... '' he began , turning to the assistant . 
`` And how we 've been begging , your honor , '' said the old soldier , his jaw quivering . 
`` He 's been dead since morning . 
After all we 're men , not dogs . '' 
`` I 'll send someone at once . 
He shall be taken away -- taken away at once , '' said the assistant hurriedly . 
`` Let us go , your honor . '' 
`` Yes , yes , let us go , '' said Rostov hastily , and lowering his eyes and shrinking , he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows of reproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him , and went out of the room . 
Going along the corridor , the assistant led Rostov to the officers ' wards , consisting of three rooms , the doors of which stood open . 
There were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officers were lying or sitting on them . 
Some were walking about the rooms in hospital dressing gowns . 
The first person Rostov met in the officers ' ward was a thin little man with one arm , who was walking about the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown , with a pipe between his teeth . 
Rostov looked at him , trying to remember where he had seen him before . 
`` See where we 've met again ! '' 
said the little man . 
`` Tushin , Tushin , do n't you remember , who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern ? 
And I 've had a bit cut off , you see ... '' he went on with a smile , pointing to the empty sleeve of his dressing gown . 
`` Looking for Vasili Dmitrich Denisov ? 
My neighbor , '' he added , when he heard who Rostov wanted . 
`` Here , here , '' and Tushin led him into the next room , from whence came sounds of several laughing voices . 
`` How can they laugh , or even live at all here ? '' 
thought Rostov , still aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strong in the soldiers ' ward , and still seeming to see fixed on him those envious looks which had followed him out from both sides , and the face of that young soldier with eyes rolled back . 
Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket , though it was nearly noon . 
`` Ah , Wostov ? 
How are you , how are you ? '' 
he called out , still in the same voice as in the regiment , but Rostov noticed sadly that under this habitual ease and animation some new , sinister , hidden feeling showed itself in the expression of Denisov 's face and the intonations of his voice . 
His wound , though a slight one , had not yet healed even now , six weeks after he had been hit . 
His face had the same swollen pallor as the faces of the other hospital patients , but it was not this that struck Rostov . 
What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him , and smiled at him unnaturally . 
He did not ask about the regiment , nor about the general state of affairs , and when Rostov spoke of these matters did not listen . 
Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded of the regiment , or in general of that other free life which was going on outside the hospital . 
He seemed to try to forget that old life and was only interested in the affair with the commissariat officers . 
On Rostov 's inquiry as to how the matter stood , he at once produced from under his pillow a paper he had received from the commission and the rough draft of his answer to it . 
He became animated when he began reading his paper and specially drew Rostov 's attention to the stinging rejoinders he made to his enemies . 
His hospital companions , who had gathered round Rostov -- a fresh arrival from the world outside - gradually began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading his answer . 
Rostov noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen had already heard that story more than once and were tired of it . 
Only the man who had the next bed , a stout Uhlan , continued to sit on his bed , gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe , and little one-armed Tushin still listened , shaking his head disapprovingly . 
In the middle of the reading , the Uhlan interrupted Denisov . 
`` But what I say is , '' he said , turning to Rostov , `` it would be best simply to petition the Emperor for pardon . 
They say great rewards will now be distributed , and surely a pardon would be granted ... '' `` Me petition the Empewo ' ! '' 
exclaimed Denisov , in a voice to which he tried hard to give the old energy and fire , but which sounded like an expression of irritable impotence . 
`` What for ? 
If I were a wobber I would ask mercy , but I 'm being court-martialed for bwinging wobbers to book . 
Let them twy me , I 'm not afwaid of anyone . 
I 've served the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen ! 
And am I to be degwaded ? 
... Listen , I 'm w ` iting to them stwaight . 
This is what I say : ` If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy ... ' '' `` It 's certainly well written , '' said Tushin , `` but that 's not the point , Vasili Dmitrich , '' and he also turned to Rostov . 
`` One has to submit , and Vasili Dmitrich does n't want to . 
You know the auditor told you it was a bad business . '' 
`` Well , let it be bad , '' said Denisov . 
`` The auditor wrote out a petition for you , '' continued Tushin , `` and you ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it . 
No doubt he '' -LRB- indicating Rostov -RRB- `` has connections on the staff . 
You wo n't find a better opportunity . '' 
`` Have n't I said I 'm not going to gwovel ? '' 
Denisov interrupted him , went on reading his paper . 
Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov , though he instinctively felt that the way advised by Tushin and the other officers was the safest , and though he would have been glad to be of service to Denisov . 
He knew his stubborn will and straightforward hasty temper . 
When the reading of Denisov 's virulent reply , which took more than an hour , was over , Rostov said nothing , and he spent the rest of the day in a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov 's hospital comrades , who had round him , telling them what he knew and listening to their stories . 
Denisov was moodily silent all the evening . 
Late in the evening , when Rostov was about to leave , he asked Denisov whether he had no commission for him . 
`` Yes , wait a bit , '' said Denisov , glancing round at the officers , and taking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window , where he had an inkpot , and sat down to write . 
`` It seems it 's no use knocking one 's head against a wall ! '' 
he said , coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope . 
In it was the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor , in which Denisov , without alluding to the offenses of the commissariat officials , simply asked for pardon . 
`` Hand it in . 
It seems ... '' He did not finish , but gave a painfully unnatural smile . 
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of Denisov 's affairs , Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor . 
On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in Tilsit . 
Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he was in attendance , to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at Tilsit . 
`` I should like to see the great man , '' he said , alluding to Napoleon , whom hitherto he , like everyone else , had always called Buonaparte . 
`` You are speaking of Buonaparte ? '' 
asked the general , smiling . 
Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was being tested . 
`` I am speaking , Prince , of the Emperor Napoleon , '' he replied . 
The general patted him on the shoulder , with a smile . 
`` You will go far , '' he said , and took him to Tilsit with him . 
Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two Emperors met . 
He saw the raft , decorated with monograms , saw Napoleon pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river , saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon 's arrival , saw both Emperors get into boats , and saw how Napoleon - reaching the raft first -- stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him , and how they both retired into the pavilion . 
Since he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to note it down . 
At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore , and listened attentively to words spoken by important personages . 
At the moment the Emperors went into the pavilion he looked at his watch , and did not forget to look at it again when Alexander came out . 
The interview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes . 
He noted this down that same evening , among other facts he felt to be of historic importance . 
As the Emperor 's suite was a very small one , it was a matter of great importance , for a man who valued his success in the service , to be at Tilsit on the occasion of this interview between the two Emperors , and having succeeded in this , Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured . 
He had not only become known , but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted him . 
Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself , so that the latter knew his face , and all those at court , far from cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer , would now have been surprised had he been absent . 
Boris lodged with another adjutant , the Polish Count Zhilinski . 
Zhilinski , a Pole brought up in Paris , was rich , and passionately fond of the French , and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit , French officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and lunching with him and Boris . 
