`` If it true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal , tell him he is a fool , that 's all ! '' 
`` No , he 's not a fool ! '' 
replied Natasha indignantly and seriously . 
`` Well then , what do you want ? 
You 're all in love nowadays . 
Well , if you are in love , marry him ! '' 
said the countess , with a laugh of annoyance . 
`` Good luck to you ! '' 
`` No , Mamma , I 'm not in love with him , I suppose I 'm not in love with him . '' 
`` Well then , tell him so . '' 
`` Mamma , are you cross ? 
Do n't be cross , dear ! 
Is it my fault ? '' 
`` No , but what is it , my dear ? 
Do you want me to go and tell him ? '' 
said the countess smiling . 
`` No , I will do it myself , only tell me what to say . 
It 's all very well for you , '' said Natasha , with a responsive smile . 
`` You should have seen how he said it ! 
I know he did not mean to say it , but it came out accidently . '' 
`` Well , all the same , you must refuse him . '' 
`` No , I must n't . 
I am so sorry for him ! 
He 's so nice . '' 
`` Well then , accept his offer . 
It 's high time for you to be married , '' answered the countess sharply and sarcastically . 
`` No , Mamma , but I 'm so sorry for him . 
I do n't know how I 'm to say it . '' 
`` And there 's nothing for you to say . 
I shall speak to him myself , '' said the countess , indignant that they should have dared to treat this little Natasha as grown up . 
`` No , not on any account ! 
I will tell him myself , and you 'll listen at the door , '' and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancing hall , where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichord with his face in his hands . 
He jumped up at the sound of her light step . 
`` Nataly , '' he said , moving with rapid steps toward her , `` decide my fate . 
It is in your hands . '' 
`` Vasili Dmitrich , I 'm so sorry for you ! 
... No , but you are so nice ... but it wo n't do ... not that ... but as a friend , I shall always love you . '' 
Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she did not understand . 
She kissed his rough curly black head . 
At this instant , they heard the quick rustle of the countess ' dress . 
She came up to them . 
`` Vasili Dmitrich , I thank you for the honor , '' she said , with an embarrassed voice , though it sounded severe to Denisov -- `` but my daughter is so young , and I thought that , as my son 's friend , you would have addressed yourself first to me . 
In that case you would not have obliged me to give this refusal . '' 
`` Countess ... '' said Denisov , with downcast eyes and a guilty face . 
He tried to say more , but faltered . 
Natasha could not remain calm , seeing him in such a plight . 
She began to sob aloud . 
`` Countess , I have done w ` ong , '' Denisov went on in an unsteady voice , `` but believe me , I so adore your daughter and all your family that I would give my life twice over ... '' He looked at the countess , and seeing her severe face said : `` Well , good-by , Countess , '' and kissing her hand , he left the room with quick resolute strides , without looking at Natasha . 
Next day Rostov saw Denisov off . 
He not wish to stay another day in Moscow . 
All Denisov 's Moscow friends gave him a farewell entertainment at the gypsies ' , with the result that he had no recollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first three stages of his journey . 
After Denisov 's departure , Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow , without going out of the house , waiting for the money his father could not at once raise , and he spent most of his time in the girls ' room . 
Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever . 
It was as if she wanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made her love him all the more , but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy of her . 
He filled the girls ' albums with verses and music , and having at last sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles and received his receipt , he left at the end of November , without taking leave of any of his acquaintances , to overtake his regiment which was already in Poland . 
After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg . 
At the Torzhok post station , either there were no horses or the postmaster would not supply them . 
Pierre was obliged to wait . 
Without undressing , he lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table , put his big feet in their overboots on the table , and began to reflect . 
`` Will you have the portmanteaus brought in ? 
And a bed got ready , and tea ? '' 
asked his valet . 
Pierre gave no answer , for he neither heard nor saw anything . 
He had begun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the same question -- one so important that he took no notice of what went on around him . 
Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got to Petersburg earlier or later , or whether he secured accommodation at this station , but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him it was a matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hours or for the rest of his life . 
The postmaster , his wife , the valet , and a peasant woman selling Torzhok embroidery came into the room offering their services . 
Without changing his careless attitude , Pierre looked at them over his spectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they could go on living without having solved the problems that so absorbed him . 
He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the day he returned from Sokolniki after the duel and had spent that first agonizing , sleepless night . 
But now , in the solitude of the journey , they seized him with special force . 
No matter what he thought about , he always returned to these same questions which he could not solve and yet could not cease to ask himself . 
It was as if the thread of the chief screw which held his life together were stripped , so that the screw could not get in or out , but went on turning uselessly in the same place . 
The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg his excellency to wait only two hours , when , come what might , he would let his excellency have the courier horses . 
It was plain that he was lying and only wanted to get more money from the traveler . 
`` Is this good or bad ? '' 
Pierre asked himself . 
`` It is good for me , bad for another traveler , and for himself it 's unavoidable , because he needs money for food ; the man said an officer had once given him a thrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses . 
But the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly as possible . 
And I , '' continued Pierre , `` shot Dolokhov because I considered myself injured , and Louis XVI was executed because they considered him a criminal , and a year later they executed those who executed him -- also for some reason . 
What is bad ? 
What is good ? 
What should one love and what hate ? 
What does one live for ? 
And what am I ? 
What is life , and what is death ? 
What power governs all ? '' 
There was no answer to any of these questions , except one , and that not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them . 
The answer was : `` You 'll die and all will end . 
You 'll die and know all , or cease asking . '' 
But dying was also dreadful . 
The Torzhok peddler woman , in a whining voice , went on offering her wares , especially a pair of goatskin slippers . 
`` I have hundreds of rubles I do n't know what to do with , and she stands in her tattered cloak looking timidly at me , '' he thought . 
`` And what does she want the money for ? 
As if that money could add a hair 's breadth to happiness or peace of mind . 
Can anything in the world make her or me less a prey to evil and death ? 
-- death which ends all and must come today or tomorrow -- at any rate , in an instant as compared with eternity . '' 
And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread , and again it turned uselessly in the same place . 
His servant handed him a half-cut novel , in the form of letters , by Madame de Souza . 
He began reading about the sufferings and virtuous struggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld . 
`` And why did she resist her seducer when she loved him ? '' 
he thought . 
