In 1810 he received letters from his parents , in which they told him of Natasha 's engagement to Bolkonski , and that the wedding would be in a year 's time because the old prince made difficulties . 
This letter grieved and mortified Nicholas . 
In the first place he was sorry that Natasha , for whom he cared more than for anyone else in the family , should be lost to the home ; and secondly , from his hussar point of view , he regretted not to have been there to show that fellow Bolkonski that connection with him was no such great honor after all , and that if he loved Natasha he might dispense with permission from his dotard father . 
For a moment he hesitated whether he should not apply for leave in order to see Natasha before she was married , but then came the maneuvers , and considerations about Sonya and about the confusion of their affairs , and Nicholas again put it off . 
But in the spring of that year , he received a letter from his mother , written without his father 's knowledge , and that letter persuaded him to return . 
She wrote that if he did not come and take matters in hand , their whole property would be sold by auction and they would all have to go begging . 
The count was so weak , and trusted Mitenka so much , and was so good-natured , that everybody took advantage of him and things were going from bad to worse . 
`` For God 's sake , I implore you , come at once if you do not wish to make me and the whole family wretched , '' wrote the countess . 
This letter touched Nicholas . 
He had that common sense of a matter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do . 
The right thing now was , if not to retire from the service , at any rate to go home on leave . 
Why he had to go he did not know ; but after his after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars , an extremely vicious gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time , and when he returned with the horse all in a lather , he informed Lavrushka -LRB- Denisov 's servant who had remained with him -RRB- and his comrades who turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was going home . 
Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would go away without having heard from the staff -- and this interested him extremely -- whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers ; strange as it was to think that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish Count Golukhovski , who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted he would sell for two thousand rubles ; incomprehensible as it seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish Mademoiselle Przazdziecka -LRB- out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska -RRB- would take place without him -- he knew he must go away from this good , bright world to somewhere where everything was stupid and confused . 
A week later he obtained his leave . 
His hussar comrades -- not only those of his own regiment , but the whole brigade -- gave Rostov a dinner to which the subscription was fifteen rubles a head , and at which there were two bands and two choirs of singers . 
Rostov danced the Trepak with Major Basov ; the tipsy officers tossed , embraced , and dropped Rostov ; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too , and shouted `` hurrah ! '' 
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first post station . 
During the first half of the journey -- from Kremenchug to Kiev -- all Rostov 's thoughts , as is usual in such cases , were behind him , with the squadron ; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget his three roans and Dozhoyveyko , his quartermaster , and to wonder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there . 
Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it -- far stronger , as though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance . 
At the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble tip , and on arriving he ran breathlessly , like a boy , up the steps of his home . 
After the rapture of meeting , and after that odd feeling of unsatisfied expectation -- the feeling that `` everything is just the same , so why did I hurry ? '' 
-- Nicholas began to settle down in his old home world . 
His father and mother were much the same , only a little older . 
What was new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasional discord , which there used not to be , and which , as Nicholas soon found out , was due to the bad state of their affairs . 
Sonya was nearly twenty ; she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing more than she was already , but that was enough . 
She exhaled happiness and love from the time Nicholas returned , and the faithful , unalterable love of this girl had a gladdening effect on him . 
Petya and Natasha surprised Nicholas most . 
Petya was a big handsome boy of thirteen , merry , witty , and mischievous , with a voice that was already breaking . 
As for Natasha , for a long while Nicholas wondered and laughed whenever he looked at her . 
`` You 're not the same at all , '' he said . 
`` How ? 
Am I uglier ? '' 
`` On the contrary , but what dignity ? 
A princess ! '' 
he whispered to her . 
`` Yes , yes , yes ! '' 
cried Natasha , joyfully . 
She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visit to Otradnoe and showed him his last letter . 
`` Well , are you glad ? '' 
Natasha asked . 
`` I am so tranquil and happy now . '' 
`` Very glad , '' answered Nicholas . 
`` He is an excellent fellow ... . 
And are you very much in love ? '' 
`` How shall I put it ? '' 
replied Natasha . 
`` I was in love with Boris , with my teacher , and with Denisov , but this is quite different . 
I feel at peace and settled . 
I know that no better man than he exists , and I am calm and contented now . 
Not at all as before . '' 
Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of the marriage for a year ; but Natasha attacked her brother with exasperation , proving to him that it could not be otherwise , and that it would be a bad thing to enter a family against the father 's will , and that she herself wished it so . 
`` You do n't at all understand , '' she said . 
Nicholas was silent and agreed with her . 
Her brother often wondered as he looked at her . 
She did not seem at all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband . 
She was even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old . 
This amazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski 's courtship skeptically . 
He could not believe that her fate was sealed , especially as he had not seen her with Prince Andrew . 
It always seemed to him that there was something not quite right about this intended marriage . 
`` Why this delay ? 
Why no betrothal ? '' 
he thought . 
Once , when he had touched on this topic with his mother , he discovered , to his surprise and somewhat to his satisfaction , that in the depth of her soul she too had doubts about this marriage . 
`` You see he writes , '' said she , showing her son a letter of Prince Andrew 's , with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to a daughter 's future married happiness , `` he writes that he wo n't come before December . 
What can be keeping him ? 
Illness , probably ! 
His health is very delicate . 
Do n't tell Natasha . 
And do n't attach importance to her being so bright : that 's because she 's living through the last days of her girlhood , but I know what she is like every time we receive a letter from him ! 
However , God grant that everything turns out well ! '' 
-LRB- She always ended with these words . -RRB- 
`` He is an excellent man ! '' 
After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull . 
He was worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupid business matters for which his mother had called him home . 
To throw off this burden as quickly as possible , on the third day after his arrival he went , angry and scowling and without answering questions as to where he was going , to Mitenka 's lodge and demanded an account of everything . 
But what an account of everything might be Nicholas knew even less than the frightened and bewildered Mitenka . 
The conversation and the examination of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long . 
The village elder , a peasant delegate , and the village clerk , who were waiting in the passage , heard with fear and delight first the young count 's voice roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder , and then words of abuse , dreadful words , ejaculated one after the other . 
`` Robber ! 
... Ungrateful wretch ! 
... I 'll hack the dog to pieces ! 
I 'm not my father ! 
... Robbing us ! 
... '' and so on . 
Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count , red in the face and with bloodshot eyes , dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of the neck and applied his foot and knee to his behind with great agility at convenient moments between the words , shouting , `` Be off ! 
Never let me see your face here again , you villain ! '' 
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into the shrubbery . 
-LRB- This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge for culprits at Otradnoe . 
Mitenka himself , returning tipsy from the town , used to hide there , and many of the residents at Otradnoe , hiding from Mitenka , knew of its protective qualities . -RRB- 
Mitenka 's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads and frightened faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovar was boiling and where the steward 's high bedstead stood with its patchwork quilt . 
The young count paid no heed to them , but , breathing hard , passed by with resolute strides and went into the house . 
The countess , who heard at once from the maids what had happened at the lodge , was calmed by the thought that now their affairs would certainly improve , but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effect this excitement might have on her son . 
She went several times to his door on tiptoe and listened , as he lighted one pipe after another . 
Next day the old count called his son aside and , with an embarrassed smile , said to him : `` But you know , my dear boy , it 's a pity you got excited ! 
Mitenka has told me all about it . '' 
`` I knew , '' thought Nicholas , `` that I should never understand anything in this crazy world . '' 
`` You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles . 
But they were carried forward -- and you did not look at the other page . '' 
`` Papa , he is a blackguard and a thief ! 
I know he is ! 
