All right then , sit down . '' 
He took the exercise book containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair with his foot . 
`` For tomorrow ! '' 
said he , quickly finding the page and making a scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail . 
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table . 
`` Wait a bit , here 's a letter for you , '' said the old man suddenly , taking a letter addressed in a woman 's hand from a bag hanging above the table , onto which he threw it . 
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the princess ' face . 
She took it quickly and bent her head over it . 
`` From Heloise ? '' 
asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still sound , yellowish teeth . 
`` Yes , it 's from Julie , '' replied the princess with a timid glance and a timid smile . 
`` I 'll let two more letters pass , but the third I 'll read , '' said the prince sternly ; `` I 'm afraid you write much nonsense . 
I 'll read the third ! '' 
`` Read this if you like , Father , '' said the princess , blushing still more and holding out the letter . 
`` The third , I said the third ! '' 
cried the prince abruptly , pushing the letter away , and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the exercise book containing geometrical figures . 
`` Well , madam , '' he began , stooping over the book close to his daughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat , so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age and tobacco , which she had known so long . 
`` Now , madam , these triangles are equal ; please note that the angle ABC ... '' The princess looked in a scared way at her father 's eyes glittering close to her ; the red patches on her face came and went , and it was plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father 's further explanations , however clear they might be . 
Whether it was the teacher 's fault or the pupil 's , this same thing happened every day : the princess ' eyes grew dim , she could not see and could not hear anything , but was only conscious of her stern father 's withered face close to her , of his breath and the smell of him , and could think only of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace . 
The old man was beside himself : moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily backward and forward , made efforts to control himself and not become vehement , but almost always did become vehement , scolded , and sometimes flung the exercise book away . 
The princess gave a wrong answer . 
`` Well now , is n't she a fool ! '' 
shouted the prince , pushing the book aside and turning sharply away ; but rising immediately , he paced up and down , lightly touched his daughter 's hair and sat down again . 
He drew up his chair , and continued to explain . 
`` This wo n't do , Princess ; it wo n't do , '' said he , when Princess Mary , having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day 's lesson , was about to leave : `` Mathematics are most important , madam ! 
I do n't want to have you like our silly ladies . 
Get used to it and you 'll like it , '' and he patted her cheek . 
`` It will drive all the nonsense out of your head . '' 
She turned to go , but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut book from the high desk . 
`` Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent you . 
Religious ! 
I do n't interfere with anyone 's belief ... I have looked at it . 
Take it . 
Well , now go . 
Go . '' 
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her . 
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad , scared expression that rarely left her and which made her plain , sickly face yet plainer . 
She sat down at her writing table , on which stood miniature portraits and which was littered with books and papers . 
The princess was as untidy as her father was tidy . 
She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter . 
It was from her most intimate friend from childhood ; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs ' name-day party . 
Julie wrote in French : Dear and precious Friend , How terrible and frightful a thing is separation ! 
Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness are wrapped up in you , and that in spite of the distance separating us our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds , my heart rebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I can not overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we parted . 
Why are we not together as we were last summer , in your big study , on the blue sofa , the confidential sofa ? 
Why can not I now , as three months ago , draw fresh moral strength from your look , so gentle , calm , and penetrating , a look I loved so well and seem to see before me as I write ? 
Having read thus far , Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which stood on her right . 
It reflected a weak , ungraceful figure and thin face . 
Her eyes , always sad , now looked with particular hopelessness at her reflection in the glass . 
`` She flatters me , '' thought the princess , turning away and continuing to read . 
But Julie did not flatter her friend , the princess ' eyes -- large , deep and luminous -LRB- it seemed as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light -RRB- -- were so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty . 
But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes -- the look they had when she was not thinking of herself . 
As with everyone , her face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass . 
She went on reading : All Moscow talks of nothing but war . 
One of my two brothers is already abroad , the other is with the Guards , who are starting on their march to the frontier . 
Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war . 
God grant that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty , in His goodness , to give us as sovereign ! 
To say nothing of my brothers , this war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart . 
I mean young Nicholas Rostov , who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the university to join the army . 
I will confess to you , dear Mary , that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a great grief to me . 
This young man , of whom I spoke to you last summer , is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and , particularly , he is so frank and has so much heart . 
He is so pure and poetic that my relations with him , transient as they were , have been one of the sweetest comforts to my poor heart , which has already suffered so much . 
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then . 
That is still too fresh . 
Ah , dear friend , you are happy not to know these poignant joys and sorrows . 
You are fortunate , for the latter are generally the stronger ! 
I know very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a friend , but this sweet friendship , this poetic and pure intimacy , were what my heart needed . 
But enough of this ! 
The chief news , about which all Moscow gossips , is the death of old Count Bezukhov , and his inheritance . 
Fancy ! 
The three princesses have received very little , Prince Vasili nothing , and it is Monsieur Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been recognized as legitimate ; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor of the finest fortune in Russia . 
It is rumored that Prince Vasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen . 
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and inheritance ; but I do know that since this young man , whom we all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre , has become Count Bezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia , I am much amused to watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable daughters , and of the young ladies themselves , toward him , though , between you and me , he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow . 
As for the past two years people have amused themselves by finding husbands for me -LRB- most of whom I do n't even know -RRB- , the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess Bezukhova . 
But you will understand that I have no desire for the post . 
A propos of marriages : do you know that a while ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me , under the seal of strict secrecy , of a plan of marriage for you . 
It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili 's son Anatole , whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee , and it is on you that his relations ' choice has fallen . 
I do n't know what you will think of it , but I consider it my duty to let you know of it . 
He is said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace . 
That is all I have been able to find out about him . 
But enough of gossip . 
I am at the end of my second sheet of paper , and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins ' . 
Read the mystical book I am sending you ; it has an enormous success here . 
Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp , it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul . 
Adieu ! 
Give my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
I embrace you as I love you . 
JULIE P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife . 
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed . 
Then she suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table . 
She took a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it . 
This is the reply she wrote , also in French : Dear and precious Friend , Your letter of the 13th has given me great delight . 
So you still love me , my romantic Julie ? 
Separation , of which you say so much that is bad , does not seem to have had its usual effect on you . 
You complain of our separation . 
What then should I say , if I dared complain , I who am deprived of all who are dear to me ? 
Ah , if we had not religion to console us life would be very sad . 
Why do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young man ? 
On such matters I am only severe with myself . 
I understand such feelings in others , and if never having felt them I can not approve of them , neither do I condemn them . 
Only it seems to me that Christian love , love of one 's neighbor , love of one 's enemy , is worthier , sweeter , and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself . 
