`` It was the officer , your honor , stained it , '' answered the artilleryman , wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve , as if apologizing for the state of his gun . 
It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided by the infantry , and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf they halted . 
It had grown so dark that one could not distinguish the uniforms ten paces off , and the firing had begun to subside . 
Suddenly , near by on the right , shouting and firing were again heard . 
Flashes of shot gleamed in the darkness . 
This was the last French attack and was met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses . 
They all rushed out of the village again , but Tushin 's guns could not move , and the artillerymen , Tushin , and the cadet exchanged silent glances as they awaited their fate . 
The firing died down and soldiers , talking eagerly , streamed out of a side street . 
`` Not hurt , Petrov ? '' 
asked one . 
`` We 've given it 'em hot , mate ! 
They wo n't make another push now , '' said another . 
`` You could n't see a thing . 
How they shot at their own fellows ! 
Nothing could be seen . 
Pitch-dark , brother ! 
Is n't there something to drink ? '' 
The French had been repulsed for the last time . 
And again and again in the complete darkness Tushin 's guns moved forward , surrounded by the humming infantry as by a frame . 
In the darkness , it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river was flowing always in one direction , humming with whispers and talk and the sound of hoofs and wheels . 
Amid the general rumble , the groans and voices of the wounded were more distinctly heard than any other sound in the darkness of the night . 
The gloom that enveloped the army was filled with their groans , which seemed to melt into one with the darkness of the night . 
After a while the moving mass became agitated , someone rode past on a white horse followed by his suite , and said something in passing : `` What did he say ? 
Where to , now ? 
Halt , is it ? 
Did he thank us ? '' 
came eager questions from all sides . 
The whole moving mass began pressing closer together and a report spread that they were ordered to halt : evidently those in front had halted . 
All remained where they were in the middle of the muddy road . 
Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible . 
Captain Tushin , having given orders to his company , sent a soldier to find a dressing station or a doctor for the cadet , and sat down by a bonfire the soldiers had kindled on the road . 
Rostov , too , dragged himself to the fire . 
From pain , cold , and damp , a feverish shivering shook his whole body . 
Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him , but he kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm , for which he could find no satisfactory position . 
He kept closing his eyes and then again looking at the fire , which seemed to him dazzlingly red , and at the feeble , round-shouldered figure of Tushin who was sitting cross-legged like a Turk beside him . 
Tushin 's large , kind , intelligent eyes were fixed with sympathy and commiseration on Rostov , who saw that Tushin with his whole heart wished to help him but could not . 
From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry , who were walking , driving past , and settling down all around . 
The sound of voices , the tramping feet , the horses ' hoofs moving in mud , the crackling of wood fires near and afar , merged into one tremulous rumble . 
It was no longer , as before , a dark , unseen river flowing through the gloom , but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after a storm . 
Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passed before and around him . 
An infantryman came to the fire , squatted on his heels , held his hands to the blaze , and turned away his face . 
`` You do n't mind your honor ? '' 
he asked Tushin . 
`` I 've lost my company , your honor . 
I do n't know where ... such bad luck ! '' 
With the soldier , an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek came up to the bonfire , and addressing Tushin asked him to have the guns moved a trifle to let a wagon go past . 
After he had gone , two soldiers rushed to the campfire . 
They were quarreling and fighting desperately , each trying to snatch from the other a boot they were both holding on to . 
`` You picked it up ? 
... I dare say ! 
You 're very smart ! '' 
one of them shouted hoarsely . 
Then a thin , pale soldier , his neck bandaged with a bloodstained leg band , came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water . 
`` Must one die like a dog ? '' 
said he . 
Tushin told them to give the man some water . 
Then a cheerful soldier ran up , begging a little fire for the infantry . 
`` A nice little hot torch for the infantry ! 
Good luck to you , fellow countrymen . 
Thanks for the fire -- we 'll return it with interest , '' said he , carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick . 
Next came four soldiers , carrying something heavy on a cloak , and passed by the fire . 
One of them stumbled . 
`` Who the devil has put the logs on the road ? '' 
snarled he . 
`` He 's dead -- why carry him ? '' 
said another . 
`` Shut up ! '' 
And they disappeared into the darkness with with their load . 
`` Still aching ? '' 
Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Your honor , you 're wanted by the general . 
He is in the hut here , '' said a gunner , coming up to Tushin . 
`` Coming , friend . '' 
Tushin rose and , buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight , walked away from the fire . 
Not far from the artillery campfire , in a hut that had been prepared for him , Prince Bagration sat at dinner , talking with some commanding officers who had gathered at his quarters . 
The little old man with the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a mutton bone , and the general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years , flushed by a glass of vodka and the dinner ; and the staff officer with the signet ring , and Zherkov , uneasily glancing at them all , and Prince Andrew , pale , with compressed lips and feverishly glittering eyes . 
In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French , and the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture , shaking his head in perplexity -- perhaps because the banner really interested him , perhaps because it was hard for him , hungry as he was , to look on at a dinner where there was no place for him . 
In the next hut there was a French colonel who had been taken prisoner by our dragoons . 
Our officers were flocking in to look at him . 
Prince Bagration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring into details of the action and our losses . 
The general whose regiment had been inspected at Braunau was informing the prince that as soon as the action began he had withdrawn from the wood , mustered the men who were woodcutting , and , allowing the French to pass him , had made a bayonet charge with two battalions and had broken up the French troops . 
`` When I saw , your excellency , that their first battalion was disorganized , I stopped in the road and thought : ` I 'll let them come on and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion ' -- and that 's what I did . '' 
The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had not managed to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened . 
Perhaps it might really have been so ? 
Could one possibly make out amid all that confusion what did or did not happen ? 
`` By the way , your excellency , I should inform you , '' he continued - remembering Dolokhov 's conversation with Kutuzov and his last interview with the gentleman-ranker -- `` that Private Dolokhov , who was reduced to the ranks , took a French officer prisoner in my presence and particularly distinguished himself . '' 
`` I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there , your excellency , '' chimed in Zherkov , looking uneasily around . 
He had not seen the hussars all that day , but had heard about them from an infantry officer . 
`` They broke up two squares , your excellency . '' 
Several of those present smiled at Zherkov 's words , expecting one of his usual jokes , but noticing that what he was saying redounded to the glory of our arms and of the day 's work , they assumed a serious expression , though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lie devoid of any foundation . 
Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel : `` Gentlemen , I thank you all ; all arms have behaved heroically : infantry , cavalry , and artillery . 
How was it that two guns were abandoned in the center ? '' 
he inquired , searching with his eyes for someone . 
-LRB- Prince Bagration did not ask about the guns on the left flank ; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at the very beginning of the action . -RRB- 
`` I think I sent you ? '' 
he added , turning to the staff officer on duty . 
`` One was damaged , '' answered the staff officer , `` and the other I ca n't understand . 
I was there all the time giving orders and had only just left ... . 
It is true that it was hot there , '' he added , modestly . 
