After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next part of the line -LRB- the Guards -RRB- was already in action . 
`` So much the better ! 
I shall see it close , '' he thought . 
He was riding almost along the front line . 
A handful of men came galloping toward him . 
They were our Uhlans who with disordered ranks were returning from the attack . 
Rostov got out of their way , involuntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding , and galloped on . 
`` That is no business of mine , '' he thought . 
He had not ridden many hundred yards after that before he saw to his left , across the whole width of the field , an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant white uniforms , mounted on black horses , trotting straight toward him and across his path . 
Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of the way of these men , and he would have got clear had they continued at the same speed , but they kept increasing their pace , so that some of the horses were already galloping . 
Rostov heard the thud of their hoofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses , their figures , and even their faces , more and more distinctly . 
They were our Horse Guards , advancing to attack the French cavalry that was coming to meet them . 
The Horse Guards were galloping , but still holding in their horses . 
Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command : `` Charge ! '' 
shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred to full speed . 
Rostov , fearing to be crushed or swept into the attack on the French , galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go , but still was not in time to avoid them . 
The last of the Horse Guards , a huge pockmarked fellow , frowned angrily on seeing Rostov before him , with whom he would inevitably collide . 
This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and his Bedouin over -LRB- Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared to these gigantic men and horses -RRB- had it not occurred to Rostov to flourish his whip before the eyes of the Guardsman 's horse . 
The heavy black horse , sixteen hands high , shied , throwing back its ears ; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his huge spurs in violently , and the horse , flourishing its tail and extending its neck , galloped on yet faster . 
Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rostov before he heard them shout , `` Hurrah ! '' 
and looking back saw that their foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry with red epaulets , probably French . 
He could see nothing more , for immediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smoke enveloped everything . 
At that moment , as the Horse Guards , having passed him , disappeared in the smoke , Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or to go where he was sent . 
This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards that amazed the French themselves . 
Rostov was horrified to hear later that of all that mass of huge and handsome men , of all those brilliant , rich youths , officers and cadets , who had galloped past him on their thousand-ruble horses , only eighteen were left after the charge . 
`` Why should I envy them ? 
My chance is not lost , and maybe I shall see the Emperor immediately ! '' 
thought Rostov and galloped on . 
When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about them and around them cannon balls were flying , of which he was aware not so much because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness on the soldiers ' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of the officers . 
Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards he heard a voice calling him by name . 
`` Rostov ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
he answered , not recognizing Boris . 
`` I say , we 've been in the front line ! 
Our regiment attacked ! '' 
said Boris with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who have been under fire for the first time . 
Rostov stopped . 
`` Have you ? '' 
he said . 
`` Well , how did it go ? '' 
`` We drove them back ! '' 
said Boris with animation , growing talkative . 
`` Can you imagine it ? '' 
and he began describing how the Guards , having taken up their position and seeing troops before them , thought they were Austrians , and all at once discovered from the cannon balls discharged by those troops that they were themselves in the front line and had unexpectedly to go into action . 
Rostov without hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse . 
`` Where are you off to ? '' 
asked Boris . 
`` With a message to His Majesty . '' 
`` There he is ! '' 
said Boris , thinking Rostov had said `` His Highness , '' and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his high shoulders and frowning brows stood a hundred paces away from them in his helmet and Horse Guards ' jacket , shouting something to a pale , white uniformed Austrian officer . 
`` But that 's the Grand Duke , and I want the commander in chief or the Emperor , '' said Rostov , and was about to spur his horse . 
`` Count ! 
Count ! '' 
shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eager as Boris . 
`` Count ! 
I am wounded in my right hand '' -LRB- and he showed his bleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it -RRB- `` and I remained at the front . 
I held my sword in my left hand , Count . 
All our family -- the von Bergs -- have been knights ! '' 
He said something more , but Rostov did not wait to hear it and rode away . 
Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space , Rostov , to avoid again getting in front of the first line as he had done when the Horse Guards charged , followed the line of reserves , going far round the place where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard . 
Suddenly he heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behind our troops , where he could never have expected the enemy to be . 
`` What can it be ? '' 
he thought . 
`` The enemy in the rear of our army ? 
Impossible ! '' 
And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himself and for the issue of the whole battle . 
`` But be that what it may , '' he reflected , `` there is no riding round it now . 
I must look for the commander in chief here , and if all is lost it is for me to perish with the rest . '' 
The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was more and more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind the village of Pratzen , which was full of troops of all kinds . 
`` What does it mean ? 
What is it ? 
Whom are they firing at ? 
Who is firing ? '' 
Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrian soldiers running in confused crowds across his path . 
`` The devil knows ! 
They 've killed everybody ! 
It 's all up now ! '' 
he was told in Russian , German , and Czech by the crowd of fugitives who understood what was happening as little as he did . 
`` Kill the Germans ! '' 
shouted one . 
`` May the devil take them -- the traitors ! '' 
`` Zum Henker diese Russen ! '' 
* muttered a German . 
* `` Hang these Russians ! '' 
Several wounded men passed along the road , and words of abuse , screams , and groans mingled in a general hubbub , then the firing died down . 
Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers had been firing at one another . 
`` My God ! 
What does it all mean ? '' 
thought he . 
`` And here , where at any moment the Emperor may see them ... . 
But no , these must be only a handful of scoundrels . 
It will soon be over , it ca n't be that , it ca n't be ! 
Only to get past them quicker , quicker ! '' 
The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov 's head . 
Though he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heights just where he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief , he could not , did not wish to , believe that . 
Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near the village of Pratzen . 
But neither they nor a single commanding officer were there , only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds . 
He urged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds , but the farther he went the more disorganized they were . 
The highroad on which he had come out was thronged with caleches , carriages of all sorts , and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms , some wounded and some not . 
This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under the dismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteries stationed on the Pratzen Heights . 
