When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the latter again thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French and wished to go away , but the officer would not hear of it . 
He was so very polite , amiable , good-natured , and genuinely grateful to Pierre for saving his life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse , and sat down with him in the parlor -- the first room they entered . 
To Pierre 's assurances that he was not a Frenchman , the captain , evidently not understanding how anyone could decline so flattering an appellation , shrugged his shoulders and said that if Pierre absolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let it be so , but for all that he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitude for saving his life . 
Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceiving the feelings of others , and had he at all understood what Pierre 's feelings were , the latter would probably have left him , but the man 's animated obtuseness to everything other than himself disarmed Pierre . 
`` A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito , '' said the officer , looking at Pierre 's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on his finger . 
`` I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship . 
A Frenchman never forgets either an insult or a service . 
I offer you my friendship . 
That is all I can say . '' 
There was so much good nature and nobility -LRB- in the French sense of the word -RRB- in the officer 's voice , in the expression of his face and in his gestures , that Pierre , unconsciously smiling in response to the Frenchman 's smile , pressed the hand held out to him . 
`` Captain Ramballe , of the 13th Light Regiment , Chevalier of the Legion of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September , '' he introduced himself , a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering his lips under his mustache . 
`` Will you now be so good as to tell me with whom I have the honor of conversing so pleasantly , instead of being in the ambulance with that maniac 's bullet in my body ? '' 
Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and , blushing , began to try to invent a name and to say something about his reason for concealing it , but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him . 
`` Oh , please ! '' 
said he . 
`` I understand your reasons . 
You are an officer ... a superior officer perhaps . 
You have borne arms against us . 
That 's not my business . 
I owe you my life . 
That is enough for me . 
I am quite at your service . 
You belong to the gentry ? '' 
he concluded with a shade of inquiry in his tone . 
Pierre bent his head . 
`` Your baptismal name , if you please . 
That is all I ask . 
Monsieur Pierre , you say ... . 
That 's all I want to know . '' 
When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar and vodka brought , with some wine which the French had taken from a Russian cellar and brought with them , Ramballe invited Pierre to share his dinner , and himself began to eat greedily and quickly like a healthy and hungry man , munching his food rapidly with his strong teeth , continually smacking his lips , and repeating -- `` Excellent ! 
Delicious ! '' 
His face grew red and was covered with perspiration . 
Pierre was hungry and shared the dinner with pleasure . 
Morel , the orderly , brought some hot water in a saucepan and placed a bottle of claret in it . 
He also brought a bottle of kvass , taken from the kitchen for them to try . 
That beverage was already known to the French and had been given a special name . 
They called it limonade de cochon -LRB- pig 's lemonade -RRB- , and Morel spoke well of the limonade de cochon he had found in the kitchen . 
But as the captain had the wine they had taken while passing through Moscow , he left the kvass to Morel and applied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux . 
He wrapped the bottle up to its neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and for Pierre . 
The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered the captain still more lively and he chatted incessantly all through dinner . 
`` Yes , my dear Monsieur Pierre , I owe you a fine votive candle for saving me from that maniac ... . 
You see , I have bullets enough in my body already . 
Here is one I got at Wagram '' -LRB- he touched his side -RRB- `` and a second at Smolensk '' -- he showed a scar on his cheek -- `` and this leg which as you see does not want to march , I got that on the seventh at the great battle of la Moskowa . 
Sacre Dieu ! 
It was splendid ! 
That deluge of fire was worth seeing . 
It was a tough job you set us there , my word ! 
You may be proud of it ! 
And on my honor , in spite of the cough I caught there , I should be ready to begin again . 
I pity those who did not see it . '' 
`` I was there , '' said Pierre . 
`` Bah , really ? 
So much the better ! 
You are certainly brave foes . 
The great redoubt held out well , by my pipe ! '' 
continued the Frenchman . 
`` And you made us pay dear for it . 
I was at it three times -- sure as I sit here . 
Three times we reached the guns and three times we were thrown back like cardboard figures . 
Oh , it was beautiful , Monsieur Pierre ! 
Your grenadiers were splendid , by heaven ! 
I saw them close up their ranks six times in succession and march as if on parade . 
Fine fellows ! 
Our King of Naples , who knows what 's what , cried ` Bravo ! ' 
Ha , ha ! 
So you are one of us soldiers ! '' 
he added , smiling , after a momentary pause . 
`` So much the better , so much the better , Monsieur Pierre ! 
Terrible in battle ... gallant ... with the fair '' -LRB- he winked and smiled -RRB- , `` that 's what the French are , Monsieur Pierre , are n't they ? '' 
The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay , so real , and so pleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he looked merrily at him . 
Probably the word `` gallant '' turned the captain 's thoughts to the state of Moscow . 
`` Apropos , tell me please , is it true that the women have all left Moscow ? 
What a queer idea ! 
What had they to be afraid of ? '' 
`` Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians entered it ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Ha , ha , ha ! '' 
The Frenchman emitted a merry , sanguine chuckle , patting Pierre on the shoulder . 
`` What a thing to say ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Paris ? 
... But Paris , Paris ... '' `` Paris -- the capital of the world , '' Pierre finished his remark for him . 
The captain looked at Pierre . 
He had a habit of stopping short in the middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing , kindly eyes . 
`` Well , if you had n't told me you were Russian , I should have wagered that you were Parisian ! 
You have that ... I do n't know what , that ... '' and having uttered this compliment , he again gazed at him in silence . 
`` I have been in Paris . 
I spent years there , '' said Pierre . 
`` Oh yes , one sees that plainly . 
Paris ! 
... A man who does n't know Paris is a savage . 
You can tell a Parisian two leagues off . 
Paris is Talma , la Duchenois , Potier , the Sorbonne , the boulevards , '' and noticing that his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before , he added quickly : `` There is only one Paris in the world . 
You have been to Paris and have remained Russian . 
Well , I do n't esteem you the less for it . '' 
Under the influence of the wine he had drunk , and after the days he had spent alone with his depressing thoughts , Pierre involuntarily enjoyed talking with this cheerful and good-natured man . 
`` To return to your ladies -- I hear they are lovely . 
What a wretched idea to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French army is in Moscow . 
What a chance those girls have missed ! 
Your peasants , now -- that 's another thing ; but you civilized people , you ought to know us better than that . 
