`` God could not have put into her heart an impulse that was against His will . 
My wife -- as she once was -- did not struggle , and perhaps she was right . 
Nothing has been found out , nothing discovered , '' Pierre again said to himself . 
`` All we can know is that we know nothing . 
And that 's the height of human wisdom . '' 
Everything within and around him seemed confused , senseless , and repellent . 
Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierre found a kind of tantalizing satisfaction . 
`` I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for this gentleman , '' said the postmaster , entering the room followed by another traveler , also detained for lack of horses . 
The newcomer was a short , large-boned , yellow-faced , wrinkled old man , with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefinite grayish color . 
Pierre took his feet off the table , stood up , and lay down on a bed that had been got ready for him , glancing now and then at the newcomer , who , with a gloomy and tired face , was wearily taking off his wraps with the aid of his servant , and not looking at Pierre . 
With a pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs , and keeping on a worn , nankeen-covered , sheepskin coat , the traveler sat down on the sofa , leaned back his big head with its broad temples and close-cropped hair , and looked at Bezukhov . 
The stern , shrewd , and penetrating expression of that look struck Pierre . 
He felt a wish to speak to the stranger , but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him a question about the roads , the traveler had closed his eyes . 
His shriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of them Pierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing a death 's head . 
The stranger sat without stirring , either resting or , as it seemed to Pierre , sunk in profound and calm meditation . 
His servant was also a yellow , wrinkled old man , without beard or mustache , evidently not because he was shaven but because they had never grown . 
This active old servant was unpacking the traveler 's canteen and preparing tea . 
He brought in a boiling samovar . 
When everything was ready , the stranger opened his eyes , moved to the table , filled a tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man to whom he passed it . 
Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness , and the need , even the inevitability , of entering into conversation with this stranger . 
The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down , * with an unfinished bit of nibbled sugar , and asked if anything more would be wanted . 
* To indicate he did not want more tea . 
`` No . 
Give me the book , '' said the stranger . 
The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotional work , and the traveler became absorbed in it . 
Pierre looked at him . 
All at once the stranger closed the book , putting in a marker , and again , leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa , sat in his former position with his eyes shut . 
Pierre looked at him and had not time to turn away when the old man , opening his eyes , fixed his steady and severe gaze straight on Pierre 's face . 
Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look , but the bright old eyes attracted him irresistibly . 
`` I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov , if I am not mistaken , '' said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice . 
Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles . 
`` I have heard of you , my dear sir , '' continued the stranger , `` and of your misfortune . '' 
He seemed to emphasize the last word , as if to say -- `` Yes , misfortune ! 
Call it what you please , I know that what happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune . '' 
-- `` I regret it very much , my dear sir . '' 
Pierre flushed and , hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed , bent forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile . 
`` I have not referred to this out of curiosity , my dear sir , but for greater reasons . '' 
He paused , his gaze still on Pierre , and moved aside on the sofa by way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him . 
Pierre felt reluctant to enter into conversation with this old man , but , submitting to him involuntarily , came up and sat down beside him . 
`` You are unhappy , my dear sir , '' the stranger continued . 
`` You are young and I am old . 
I should like to help you as far as lies in my power . '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
said Pierre , with a forced smile . 
`` I am very grateful to you . 
Where are you traveling from ? '' 
The stranger 's face was not genial , it was even cold and severe , but in spite of this , both the face and words of his new acquaintance were irresistibly attractive to Pierre . 
`` But if for reason you do n't feel inclined to talk to me , '' said the old man , `` say so , my dear sir . '' 
And he suddenly smiled , in an unexpected and tenderly paternal way . 
`` Oh no , not at all ! 
On the contrary , I am very glad to make your acquaintance , '' said Pierre . 
And again , glancing at the stranger 's hands , he looked more closely at the ring , with its skull -- a Masonic sign . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' he said , `` are you a Mason ? '' 
`` Yes , I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons , '' said the stranger , looking deeper and deeper into Pierre 's eyes . 
`` And in their name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you . '' 
`` I am afraid , '' said Pierre , smiling , and wavering between the confidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and his own habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs -- `` I am afraid I am very far from understanding -- how am I to put it ? 
-- I am afraid my way of looking at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall not understand one another . '' 
`` I know your outlook , '' said the Mason , `` and the view of life you mention , and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts , is the one held by the majority of people , and is the invariable fruit of pride , indolence , and ignorance . 
Forgive me , my dear sir , but if I had not known it I should not have addressed you . 
Your view of life is a regrettable delusion . '' 
`` Just as I may suppose you to be deluded , '' said Pierre , with a faint smile . 
`` I should never dare to say that I know the truth , '' said the Mason , whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precision and firmness . 
`` No one can attain to truth by himself . 
Only by laying stone on stone with the cooperation of all , by the millions of generations from our forefather Adam to our own times , is that temple reared which is to be a worthy dwelling place of the Great God , '' he added , and closed his eyes . 
`` I ought to tell you that I do not believe ... do not believe in God , '' said Pierre , regretfully and with an effort , feeling it essential to speak the whole truth . 
The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man with millions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he , poor man , had not the five rubles that would make him happy . 
`` Yes , you do not know Him , my dear sir , '' said the Mason . 
`` You can not know Him . 
You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy . '' 
`` Yes , yes , I am unhappy , '' assented Pierre . 
`` But what am I to do ? '' 
`` You know Him not , my dear sir , and so you are very unhappy . 
You do not know Him , but He is here , He is in me , He is in my words , He is in thee , and even in those blasphemous words thou hast just uttered ! '' 
pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice . 
He paused and sighed , evidently trying to calm himself . 
`` If He were not , '' he said quietly , `` you and I would not be speaking of Him , my dear sir . 
Of what , of whom , are we speaking ? 
Whom hast thou denied ? '' 
he suddenly asked with exulting austerity and authority in his voice . 
`` Who invented Him , if He did not exist ? 
Whence came thy conception of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being ? 
didst thou , and why did the whole world , conceive the idea of the existence of such an incomprehensible Being , a Being all-powerful , eternal , and infinite in all His attributes ? 
... '' He stopped and remained silent for a long time . 
Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence . 
`` He exists , but to understand Him is hard , '' the Mason began again , looking not at Pierre but straight before him , and turning the leaves of his book with his old hands which from excitement he could not keep still . 
`` If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt I could bring him to thee , could take him by the hand and show him to thee . 
But how can I , an insignificant mortal , show His omnipotence , His infinity , and all His mercy to one who is blind , or who shuts his eyes that he may not see or understand Him and may not see or understand his own vileness and sinfulness ? '' 
He paused again . 
`` Who art thou ? 
Thou dreamest that thou art wise because thou couldst utter those blasphemous words , '' he went on , with a somber and scornful smile . 
`` And thou art more foolish and unreasonable than a little child , who , playing with the parts of a skillfully made watch , dares to say that , as he does not understand its use , he does not believe in the master who made it . 
To know Him is hard ... . 
For ages , from our forefather Adam to our own day , we labor to attain that knowledge and are still infinitely far from our aim ; but in our lack of understanding we see only our weakness and His greatness ... '' Pierre listened with swelling heart , gazing into the Mason 's face with shining eyes , not interrupting or questioning him , but believing with his whole soul what the stranger said . 
Whether he accepted the wise reasoning contained in the Mason 's words , or believed as a child believes , in the speaker 's tone of conviction and earnestness , or the tremor of the speaker 's voice -- which sometimes almost broke -- or those brilliant aged eyes grown old in this conviction , or the calm firmness and certainty of his vocation , which radiated from his whole being -LRB- and which struck Pierre especially by contrast with his own dejection and hopelessness -RRB- -- at any rate , Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe and he did believe , and felt a joyful sense of comfort , regeneration , and return to life . 
`` He is not to be apprehended by reason , but by life , '' said the Mason . 
`` I do not understand , '' said Pierre , feeling with dismay doubts reawakening . 
He was afraid of any want of clearness , any weakness , in the Mason 's arguments ; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him . 
`` I do n't understand , '' he said , `` how it is that the mind of man can not attain the knowledge of which you speak . '' 
The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile . 
`` The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wish to imbibe , '' he said . 
