A petition ? '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the person in the other room . 
`` Another petitioner , '' answered the man with the braces . 
`` Tell him to come later . 
He 'll be coming out directly , we must go . '' 
`` Later ... later ! 
Tomorrow . 
It 's too late ... '' Rostov turned and was about to go , but the man in the braces stopped him . 
`` Whom have you come from ? 
Who are you ? '' 
`` I come from Major Denisov , '' answered Rostov . 
`` Are you an officer ? '' 
`` Lieutenant Count Rostov . '' 
`` What audacity ! 
Hand it in through your commander . 
And go along with you ... go , '' and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handed him . 
Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch there were many officers and generals in full parade uniform , whom he had to pass . 
Cursing his temerity , his heart sinking at the thought of finding himself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put to shame and arrested in his presence , fully alive now to the impropriety of his conduct and repenting of it , Rostov , with downcast eyes , was making his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when a familiar voice called him and a hand detained him . 
`` What are you doing here , sir , in civilian dress ? '' 
asked a deep voice . 
It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor 's special favor during this campaign , and who had formerly commanded the division in which Rostov was serving . 
Rostov , in dismay , began justifying himself , but seeing the kindly , jocular face of the general , he took him aside and in an excited voice told him the whole affair , asking him to intercede for Denisov , whom the general knew . 
Having heard Rostov to the end , the general shook his head gravely . 
`` I 'm sorry , sorry for that fine fellow . 
Give me the letter . '' 
Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explaining Denisov 's case , when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs were heard on the stairs , and the general , leaving him , went to the porch . 
The gentlemen of the Emperor 's suite ran down the stairs and went to their horses . 
Hayne , the same groom who had been at Austerlitz , led up the Emperor 's horse , and the faint creak of a footstep Rostov knew at once was heard on the stairs . 
Forgetting the danger of being recognized , Rostov went close to the porch , together with some inquisitive civilians , and again , after two years , saw those features he adored : that same face and same look and step , and the same union of majesty and mildness ... . 
And the feeling of enthusiasm and love for his sovereign rose again in Rostov 's soul in all its old force . 
In the uniform of the Preobrazhensk regiment -- white chamois-leather breeches and high boots -- and wearing a star Rostov did not know -LRB- it was that of the Legion d'honneur -RRB- , the monarch came out into the porch , putting on his gloves and carrying his hat under his arm . 
He stopped and looked about him , brightening everything around by his glance . 
He spoke a few words to some of the generals , and , recognizing the former commander of Rostov 's division , smiled and beckoned to him . 
All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking for some time to the Emperor . 
The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward his horse . 
Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazers -LRB- among whom was Rostov -RRB- moved nearer to the Emperor . 
Stopping beside his horse , with his hand on the saddle , the Emperor turned to the cavalry general and said in a loud voice , evidently wishing to be heard by all : `` I can not do it , General . 
I can not , because the law is stronger than I , '' and he raised his foot to the stirrup . 
The general bowed his head respectfully , and the monarch mounted and rode down the street at a gallop . 
Beside himself with enthusiasm , Rostov ran after him with the crowd . 
The Emperor rode to the square where , facing one another , a battalion of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and a battalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left . 
As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions , which presented arms , another group of horsemen galloped up to the opposite flank , and at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon . 
It could be no one else . 
He came at a gallop , wearing a small hat , a blue uniform open over a white vest , and the St. Andrew ribbon over his shoulder . 
He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horse with a crimson gold-embroidered saddlecloth . 
On approaching Alexander he raised his hat , and as he did so , Rostov , with his cavalryman 's eye , could not help noticing that Napoleon did not sit well or firmly in the saddle . 
The battalions shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
and `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
Napoleon said something to Alexander , and both Emperors dismounted and took each other 's hands . 
Napoleon 's face wore an unpleasant and artificial smile . 
Alexander was saying something affable to him . 
In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes ' horses , which were pushing back the crowd , Rostov kept his eyes on every movement of Alexander and Bonaparte . 
It struck him as a surprise that Alexander treated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at ease with the Tsar , as if such relations with an Emperor were an everyday matter to him . 
Alexander and Napoleon , with the long train of their suites , approached the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and came straight up to the crowd standing there . 
The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close to the Emperors that Rostov , standing in the front row , was afraid he might be recognized . 
`` Sire , I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to the bravest of your soldiers , '' said a sharp , precise voice , articulating every letter . 
This was said by the undersized Napoleon , looking up straight into Alexander 's eyes . 
Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him and , bending his head , smiled pleasantly . 
`` To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war , '' added Napoleon , accentuating each syllable , as with a composure and assurance exasperating to Rostov , he ran his eyes over the Russian ranks drawn up before him , who all presented arms with their eyes fixed on their Emperor . 
`` Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel ? '' 
said Alexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski , the commander of the battalion . 
Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand , tore it in doing so , and threw it away . 
An aide-de-camp behind him rushed forward and picked it up . 
`` To whom shall it be given ? '' 
the Emperor Alexander asked Koslovski , in Russian in a low voice . 
`` To whomever Your Majesty commands . '' 
The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and , glancing back , remarked : `` But we must give him an answer . '' 
Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in his scrutiny . 
`` Can it be me ? '' 
thought Rostov . 
`` Lazarev ! '' 
the colonel called , with a frown , and Lazarev , the first soldier in the rank , stepped briskly forward . 
`` Where are you off to ? 
Stop here ! '' 
voices whispered to Lazarev who did not know where to go . 
Lazarev stopped , casting a sidelong look at his colonel in alarm . 
His face twitched , as often happens to soldiers called before the ranks . 
Napoleon slightly turned his head , and put his plump little hand out behind him as if to take something . 
The members of his suite , guessing at once what he wanted , moved about and whispered as they passed something from one to another , and a page -- the same one Rostov had seen the previous evening at Boris ' -- ran forward and , bowing respectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting a moment , laid in it an Order on a red ribbon . 
Napoleon , without looking , pressed two fingers together and the badge was between them . 
Then he approached Lazarev -LRB- who rolled his eyes and persistently gazed at his own monarch -RRB- , looked round at the Emperor Alexander to imply that what he was now doing was done for the sake of his ally , and the small white hand holding the Order touched one of Lazarev 's buttons . 
It was as if Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for his hand to deign to touch that soldier 's breast for the soldier to be forever happy , rewarded , and distinguished from everyone else in the world . 
Napoleon merely laid the cross on Lazarev 's breast and , dropping his hand , turned toward Alexander as though sure that the cross would adhere there . 
And it really did . 
Officious hands , Russian and French , immediately seized the cross and fastened it to the uniform . 
Lazarev glanced morosely at the little man with white hands who was doing something to him and , still standing motionless presenting arms , looked again straight into Alexander 's eyes , as if asking whether he should stand there , or go away , or do something else . 
But receiving no orders , he remained for some time in that rigid position . 
The Emperors remounted and rode away . 
The Preobrazhensk battalion , breaking rank , mingled with the French Guards and sat down at the tables prepared for them . 
Lazarev sat in the place of honor . 
Russian and French officers embraced him , congratulated him , and pressed his hands . 
Crowds of officers and civilians drew near merely to see him . 
A rumble of Russian and French voices and laughter filled the air round the tables in the square . 
Two officers with flushed faces , looking cheerful and happy , passed by Rostov . 
`` What d'you think of the treat ? 
All on silver plate , '' one of them was saying . 
`` Have you seen Lazarev ? '' 
`` I have . '' 
`` Tomorrow , I hear , the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner . '' 
