An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him a gold snuffbox , which he took . 
`` Yes , it has happened luckily for you , '' he said , raising the open snuffbox to his nose . 
`` You are fond of travel , and in three days you will see Moscow . 
You surely did not expect to see that Asiatic capital . 
You will have a pleasant journey . '' 
De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travel -LRB- of which he had not till then been aware -RRB- . 
`` Ha , what 's this ? '' 
asked Napoleon , noticing that all the courtiers were looking at something concealed under a cloth . 
With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and without turning his back to the Emperor retired two steps , twitching off the cloth at the same time , and said : `` A present to Your Majesty from the Empress . '' 
It was a portrait , painted in bright colors by Gerard , of the son borne to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria , the boy whom for some reason everyone called `` The King of Rome . '' 
A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in the Sistine Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball . 
The ball represented the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand a scepter . 
Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express by depicting the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick , the allegory apparently seemed to Napoleon , as it had done to all who had seen it in Paris , quite clear and very pleasing . 
`` The King of Rome ! '' 
he said , pointing to the portrait with a graceful gesture . 
`` Admirable ! '' 
With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing the expression of his face at will , he drew nearer to the portrait and assumed a look of pensive tenderness . 
He felt that what he now said and did would be historical , and it seemed to him that it would now be best for him -- whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ball with the terrestrial globe -- to show , in contrast to that grandeur , the simplest paternal tenderness . 
His eyes grew dim , he moved forward , glanced round at a chair -LRB- which seemed to place itself under him -RRB- , and sat down on it before the portrait . 
At a single gesture from him everyone went out on tiptoe , leaving the great man to himself and his emotion . 
Having sat still for a while he touched -- himself not knowing why - the thick spot of paint representing the highest light in the portrait , rose , and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty . 
He ordered the portrait to be carried outside his tent , that the Old Guard , stationed round it , might not be deprived of the pleasure of seeing the King of Rome , the son and heir of their adored monarch . 
And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting with him , they heard , as Napoleon had anticipated , the rapturous cries of the officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see the portrait . 
`` Vive l'Empereur ! 
Vive le roi de Rome ! 
Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
came those ecstatic cries . 
After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset 's presence dictated his order of the day to the army . 
`` Short and energetic ! '' 
he remarked when he had read over the proclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections . 
It ran : Soldiers ! 
This is the battle you have so longed for . 
Victory depends on you . 
It is essential for us ; it will give us all we need : comfortable quarters and a speedy return to our country . 
Behave as you did at Austerlitz , Friedland , Vitebsk , and Smolensk . 
Let our remotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride . 
Let it be said of each of you : `` He was in the great battle before Moscow ! '' 
`` Before Moscow ! '' 
repeated Napoleon , and inviting M. de Beausset , who was so fond of travel , to accompany him on his ride , he went out of the tent to where the horses stood saddled . 
`` Your Majesty is too kind ! '' 
replied de Beausset to the invitation to accompany the Emperor ; he wanted to sleep , did not know how to ride and was afraid of doing so . 
But Napoleon nodded to the traveler , and de Beausset had to mount . 
When Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards before his son 's portrait grew still louder . 
Napoleon frowned . 
`` Take him away ! '' 
he said , pointing with a gracefully majestic gesture to the portrait . 
`` It is too soon for him to see a field of battle . '' 
De Beausset closed his eyes , bowed his head , and sighed deeply , to indicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor 's words . 
On the twenty-fifth of August , so his historians tell us , Napoleon spent the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality , considering plans submitted to him by his marshals , and personally giving commands to his generals . 
The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolocha had been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on the twenty-fourth , and part of the line -- the left flank -- had been drawn back . 
That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of it the ground was more open and level than elsewhere . 
It was evident to anyone , military or not , that it was here the French should attack . 
It would seem that not much consideration was needed to reach this conclusion , nor any particular care or trouble on the part of the Emperor and his marshals , nor was there any need of that special and supreme quality called genius that people are so apt to ascribe to Napoleon ; yet the historians who described the event later and the men who then surrounded Napoleon , and he himself , thought otherwise . 
Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with a profound air and in silence , nodded with approval or shook his head dubiously , and without communicating to the generals around him the profound course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave them his final conclusions in the form of commands . 
Having listened to a suggestion from Davout , who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl , to turn the Russian left wing , Napoleon said it should not be done , without explaining why not . 
To a proposal made by General Campan -LRB- who was to attack the fleches -RRB- to lead his division through the woods , Napoleon agreed , though the so-called Duke of Elchingen -LRB- Ney -RRB- ventured to remark that a movement through the woods was dangerous and might disorder the division . 
Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt , Napoleon pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spots where two batteries should be set up by the morrow to act against the Russian entrenchments , and the places where , in line with them , the field artillery should be placed . 
After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent , and the dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation . 
These dispositions , of which the French historians write with enthusiasm and other historians with profound respect , were as follows : At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on the plain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on the opposing batteries of the enemy . 
At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps , General Pernetti , with thirty cannon of Campan 's division and all the howitzers of Dessaix 's and Friant 's divisions , will move forward , open fire , and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy 's battery , against which will operate : 24 guns of the artillery of the Guards 30 guns of Campan 's division and 8 guns of Friant 's and Dessaix 's divisions -- in all 62 guns . 
The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps , General Fouche , will place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps , sixteen in all , on the flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment on the left , which will have forty guns in all directed against it . 
General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with all the howitzers of the Guard 's artillery against either one or other of the entrenchments . 
During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through the wood on the village and turn the enemy 's position . 
General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification . 
After the advance has begun in this manner , orders will be given in accordance with the enemy 's movements . 
The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns of the right wing are heard . 
The sharpshooters of Morand 's division and of the vice-King 's division will open a heavy fire on seeing the attack commence on the right wing . 
The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its three bridges , advancing to the same heights as Morand 's and Gibrard 's divisions , which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces . 
All this must be done in good order -LRB- le tout se fera avec ordre et methode -RRB- as far as possible retaining troops in reserve . 
The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk , September , 6 , 1812 . 
These dispositions , which are very obscure and confused if one allows oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius , related to Napoleon 's orders to deal with four points -- four different orders . 
Not one of these was , or could be , carried out . 
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the spot chosen by Napoleon , with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche ; which were to come in line with them , 102 guns in all , were to open fire and shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts . 
This could not be done , as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not carry to the Russian works , and those 102 guns shot into the air until the nearest commander , contrary to Napoleon 's instructions , moved them forward . 
The second order was that Poniatowski , moving to the village through the wood , should turn the Russian left flank . 
This could not be done and was not done , because Poniatowski , advancing on the village through the wood , met Tuchkov there barring his way , and could not and did not turn the Russian position . 
The third order was : General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification . 
General Campan 's division did not seize the first fortification but was driven back , for on emerging from the wood it had to reform under grapeshot , of which Napoleon was unaware . 
The fourth order was : The vice-King will occupy the village -LRB- Borodino -RRB- and cross by its three bridges , advancing to the same heights as Morand 's and Gdrard 's divisions -LRB- for whose movements no directions are given -RRB- , which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces . 
As far as one can make out , not so much from this unintelligible sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders given him , he was to advance from the left through Borodino to the redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advance simultaneously from the front . 
All this , like the other parts of the disposition , was not and could not be executed . 
After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven back to the Kolocha and could get no farther ; while the divisions of Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back , and the redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry -LRB- a thing probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon -RRB- . 
So not one of the orders in the disposition was , or could be , executed . 
But in the disposition it is said that , after the fight has commenced in this manner , orders will be given in accordance with the enemy 's movements , and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be made by Napoleon during the battle . 
But this was not and could not be done , for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that , as appeared later , he could not know the course of the battle and not one of his orders during the fight could be executed . 
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino because Napoleon had a cold , and that if he had not had a cold the orders he gave before and during the battle would have been still more full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the world have been changed . 
To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by the will of one man -- Peter the Great -- and that France from a republic became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one man -- Napoleon -- to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical and convincing . 
If it had depended on Napoleon 's will to fight or not to fight the battle of Borodino , and if this or that other arrangement depended on his will , then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will might have saved Russia , and consequently the valet who omitted to bring Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been the savior of Russia . 
Along that line of thought such a deduction is indubitable , as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest -LRB- without knowing what he was jesting at -RRB- when he saw that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX 's stomach being deranged . 
But to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man , Peter I , or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia begun by the will of one man , Napoleon , that argument seems not merely untrue and irrational , but contrary to all human reality . 
To the question of what causes historic events another answer presents itself , namely , that the course of human events is predetermined from on high -- depends on the coincidence of the wills of all who take part in the events , and that a Napoleon 's influence on the course of these events is purely external and fictitious . 
Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX 's will , though he gave the order for it and thought it was done as a result of that order ; and strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter of eighty thousand men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon 's will , though he ordered the commencement and conduct of the battle and thought it was done because he ordered it ; strange as these suppositions appear , yet human dignity -- which tells me that each of us is , if not more at least not less a man than the great Napoleon -- demands the acceptance of that solution of the question , and historic investigation abundantly confirms it . 
At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one . 
That was all done by the soldiers . 
Therefore it was not he who killed people . 
The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle of Borodino not because of Napoleon 's orders but by their own volition . 
The whole army -- French , Italian , German , Polish , and Dutch -- hungry , ragged , and weary of the campaign , felt at the sight of an army blocking their road to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must be drunk . 
Had Napoleon then forbidden them to fight the Russians , they would have killed him and have proceeded to fight the Russians because it was inevitable . 
When they heard Napoleon 's proclamation offering them , as compensation for mutilation and death , the words of posterity about their having been in the battle before Moscow , they cried `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
just as they had cried `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
