Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law , Pierre late one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to see Joseph Alexeevich . 
This is what he noted in his diary : Moscow , 17th November I have just returned from my benefactor , and hasten to write down what I have experienced . 
Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and has for three years been suffering from a painful disease of the bladder . 
No one has ever heard him utter a groan or a word of complaint . 
From morning till late at night , except when he eats his very plain food , he is working at science . 
He received me graciously and made me sit down on the bed on which he lay . 
I made the sign of the Knights of the East and of Jerusalem , and he responded in the same manner , asking me with a mild smile what I had learned and gained in the Prussian and Scottish lodges . 
I told him everything as best I could , and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge , of the bad reception I had encountered , and of my rupture with the Brothers . 
Joseph Alexeevich , having remained silent and thoughtful for a good while , told me his view of the matter , which at once lit up for me my whole past and the future path I should follow . 
He surprised me by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of the order : -LRB- 1 -RRB- The preservation and study of the mystery . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- The purification and reformation of oneself for its reception , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The improvement of the human race by striving for such purification . 
Which is the principal aim of these three ? 
Certainly self-reformation and self-purification . 
Only to this aim can we always strive independently of circumstances . 
But at the same time just this aim demands the greatest efforts of us ; and so , led astray by pride , losing sight of this aim , we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in our impurity we are unworthy to receive , or seek the reformation of the human race while ourselves setting an example of baseness and profligacy . 
Illuminism is not a pure doctrine , just because it is attracted by social activity and puffed up by pride . 
On this ground Joseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity , and in the depth of my soul I agreed with him . 
Talking of my family affairs he said to me , `` the chief duty of a true Mason , as I have told you , lies in perfecting himself . 
We often think that by removing all the difficulties of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim , but on the contrary , my dear sir , it is only in the midst of worldly cares that we can attain our three chief aims : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Self-knowledge -- for man can only know himself by comparison , -LRB- 2 -RRB- Self-perfecting , which can only be attained by conflict , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The attainment of the chief virtue -- love of death . 
Only the vicissitudes of life can show us its vanity and develop our innate love of death or of rebirth to a new life . '' 
These words are all the more remarkable because , in spite of his great physical sufferings , Joseph Alexeevich is never weary of life though he loves death , for which -- in spite of the purity and loftiness of his inner man -- he does not yet feel himself sufficiently prepared . 
My benefactor then explained to me fully the meaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that the numbers three and seven are the basis of everything . 
He advised me not to avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers , but to take up only second-grade posts in the lodge , to try , while diverting the Brothers from pride , to turn them toward the true path self-knowledge and self-perfecting . 
Besides this he advised me for myself personally above all to keep a watch over myself , and to that end he gave me a notebook , the one I am now writing in and in which I will in future note down all my actions . 
Petersburg , 23rd November I am again living with my wife . 
My mother-in-law came to me in tears and said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her ; that she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion , and much more . 
I knew that if I once let myself see her I should not have strength to go on refusing what she wanted . 
In my perplexity I did not know whose aid and advice to seek . 
Had my benefactor been here he would have told me what to do . 
I went to my room and reread Joseph Alexeevich 's letters and recalled my conversations with him , and deduced from it all that I ought not to refuse a suppliant , and ought to reach a helping hand to everyone -- especially to one so closely bound to me -- and that I must bear my cross . 
But if I forgive her for the sake of doing right , then let union with her have only a spiritual aim . 
That is what I decided , and what I wrote to Joseph Alexeevich . 
I told my wife that I begged her to forget the past , to forgive me whatever wrong I may have done her , and that I had nothing to forgive . 
It gave me joy to tell her this . 
She need not know how hard it was for me to see her again . 
I have settled on the upper floor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling of regeneration . 
At that time , as always happens , the highest society that met at court and at the grand balls was divided into several circles , each with its own particular tone . 
The largest of these was the French circle of the Napoleonic alliance , the circle of Count Rumyantsev and Caulaincourt . 
In this group Helene , as soon as she had settled in Petersburg with her husband , took a very prominent place . 
She was visited by the members of the French embassy and by many belonging to that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manners . 
Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of the Emperors and had brought from there these connections with the Napoleonic notabilities . 
At Erfurt her success had been brilliant . 
Napoleon himself had noticed her in the theater and said of her : `` C'est un superbe animal . '' 
* Her success as a beautiful and elegant woman did not surprise Pierre , for she had become even handsomer than before . 
What did surprise him was that during these last two years his wife had succeeded in gaining the reputation `` d' une femme charmante , aussi spirituelle que belle . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- The distinguished Prince de Ligne wrote her eight-page letters . 
Bilibin saved up his epigrams to produce them in Countess Bezukhova 's presence . 
To be received in the Countess Bezukhova 's salon was regarded as a diploma of intellect . 
Young men read books before attending Helene 's evenings , to have something to say in her salon , and secretaries of the embassy , and even ambassadors , confided diplomatic secrets to her , so that in a way Helene was a power . 
Pierre , who knew she was very stupid , sometimes attended , with a strange feeling of perplexity and fear , her evenings and dinner parties , where politics , poetry , and philosophy were discussed . 
At these parties his feelings were like those of a conjuror who always expects his trick to be found out at any moment . 
But whether because stupidity was just what was needed to run such a salon , or because those who were deceived found pleasure in the deception , at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene Bezukhova 's reputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly established that she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and everybody would go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a profound meaning in it of which she herself had no conception . 
* `` That 's a superb animal . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` Of a charming woman , as witty as she is lovely . '' 
Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman . 
He was that absent-minded crank , a grand seigneur husband who was in no one 's way , and far from spoiling the high tone and general impression of the drawing room , he served , by the contrast he presented to her , as an advantageous background to his elegant and tactful wife . 
Pierre during the last two years , as a result of his continual absorption in abstract interests and his sincere contempt for all else , had acquired in his wife 's circle , which did not interest him , that air of unconcern , indifference , and benevolence toward all , which can not be acquired artificially and therefore inspires involuntary respect . 
He entered his wife 's drawing room as one enters a theater , was acquainted with everybody , equally pleased to see everyone , and equally indifferent to them all . 
Sometimes he joined in a conversation which interested him and , regardless of whether any `` gentlemen of the embassy '' were present or not , lispingly expressed his views , which were sometimes not at all in accord with the accepted tone of the moment . 
But the general opinion concerning the queer husband of `` the most distinguished woman in Petersburg '' was so well established that no one took his freaks seriously . 
Among the many young men who frequented her house every day , Boris Drubetskoy , who had already achieved great success in the service , was the most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene 's return from Erfurt . 
Helene spoke of him as `` mon page '' and treated him like a child . 
Her smile for him was the same as for everybody , but sometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable . 
Toward him Boris behaved with a particularly dignified and sad deference . 
This shade of deference also disturbed Pierre . 
He had suffered so painfully three years before from the mortification to which his wife had subjected him that he now protected himself from the danger of its repetition , first by not being a husband to his wife , and secondly by not allowing himself to suspect . 
`` No , now that she has become a bluestocking she has finally renounced her former infatuations , '' he told himself . 
`` There has never been an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairs of the heart '' -- a statement which , though gathered from an unknown source , he believed implicitly . 
Yet strange to say Boris ' presence in his wife 's drawing room -LRB- and he was almost always there -RRB- had a physical effect upon Pierre ; it constricted his limbs and destroyed the unconsciousness and freedom of his movements . 
`` What a strange antipathy , '' thought Pierre , `` yet I used to like him very much . '' 
In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman , the rather blind and absurd husband of a distinguished wife , a clever crank who did nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate , good-natured fellow . 
But a complex and difficult process of internal development was taking place all this time in Pierre 's soul , revealing much to him and causing him many spiritual doubts and joys . 
Pierre went on with his diary , and this is what he wrote in it during that time : 24th November Got up at eight , read the Scriptures , then went to my duties . 
-LSB- By Joseph Alexeevich 's advice Pierre had entered the service of the state and served on one of the committees . -RSB- 
Returned home for dinner and dined alone -- the countess had many visitors I do not like . 
I ate and drank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for the Brothers . 
In the evening I went down to the countess and told a funny story about B. , and only remembered that I ought not to have done so when everybody laughed loudly at it . 
I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind . 
Great God , help me to walk in Thy paths , -LRB- 1 -RRB- to conquer anger by calmness and deliberation , -LRB- 2 -RRB- to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion , -LRB- 3 -RRB- to withdraw from worldliness , but not avoid -LRB- a -RRB- the service of the state , -LRB- b -RRB- family duties , -LRB- c -RRB- relations with my friends , and the management of my affairs . 
27th November I got up late . 
On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth . 
O God , help and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways ! 
Read the Scriptures , but without proper feeling . 
Brother Urusov came and we talked about worldly vanities . 
He told me of the Emperor 's new projects . 
I began to criticize them , but remembered my rules and my benefactor 's words -- that a true Freemason should be a zealous worker for the state when his aid is required and a quiet onlooker when not called on to assist . 
My tongue is my enemy . 
Brothers G. V. and O. visited me and we had a preliminary talk about the reception of a new Brother . 
They laid on me the duty of Rhetor . 
I feel myself weak and unworthy . 
Then our talk turned to the interpretation of the seven pillars and steps of the Temple , the seven sciences , the seven virtues , the seven vices , and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit . 
Brother O. was very eloquent . 
In the evening the admission took place . 
The new decoration of the Premises contributed much to the magnificence of the spectacle . 
It was Boris Drubetskoy who was admitted . 
I nominated him and was the Rhetor . 
A strange feeling agitated me all the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber . 
I caught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which I vainly tried to overcome . 
That is why I should really like to save him from evil and lead him into the path of truth , but evil thoughts of him did not leave me . 
It seemed to me that his object in entering the Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with members of our lodge . 
