Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle George went out of the room to change her costume . 
In the drawing room people began arranging the chairs and taking their seats . 
Anatole moved a chair for Natasha and was about to sit down beside her , but the count , who never lost sight of her , took the seat himself . 
Anatole sat down behind her . 
Mademoiselle George , with her bare , fat , dimpled arms , and a red shawl draped over one shoulder , came into the space left vacant for her , and assumed an unnatural pose . 
Enthusiastic whispering was audible . 
Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audience and began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love for her son . 
In some places she raised her voice , in others she whispered , lifting her head triumphantly ; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarse sounds , rolling her eyes . 
`` Adorable ! 
divine ! 
delicious ! '' 
was heard from every side . 
Natasha looked at the fat actress , but neither saw nor heard nor understood anything of what went on before her . 
She only felt herself again completely borne away into this strange senseless world - so remote from her old world -- a world in which it was impossible to know what was good or bad , reasonable or senseless . 
Behind her sat Anatole , and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightened sense of expectancy . 
After the first monologue the whole company rose and surrounded Mademoiselle George , expressing their enthusiasm . 
`` How beautiful she is ! '' 
Natasha remarked to her father who had also risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress . 
`` I do n't think so when I look at you ! '' 
said Anatole , following Natasha . 
He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him . 
`` You are enchanting ... from the moment I saw you I have never ceased ... '' `` Come , come , Natasha ! '' 
said the count , as he turned back for his daughter . 
`` How beautiful she is ! '' 
Natasha without saying anything stepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiring eyes . 
After giving several recitations , Mademoiselle George left , and Countess Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom . 
The count wished to go home , but Helene entreated him not to spoil her improvised ball , and the Rostovs stayed on . 
Anatole asked Natasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and hand and told her she was bewitching and that he loved her . 
During the ecossaise , which she also danced with him , Anatole said nothing when they happened to be by themselves , but merely gazed at her . 
Natasha lifted her frightened eyes to him , but there was such confident tenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not , whilst looking at him , say what she had to say . 
She lowered her eyes . 
`` Do n't say such things to me . 
I am betrothed and love another , '' she said rapidly ... . 
She glanced at him . 
Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said . 
`` Do n't speak to me of that ! 
What can I do ? '' 
said he . 
`` I tell you I am madly , madly , in love with you ! 
Is it my fault that you are enchanting ? 
... It 's our turn to begin . '' 
Natasha , animated and excited , looked about her with wide-open frightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual . 
She understood hardly anything that went on that evening . 
They danced the ecossaise and the Grossvater . 
Her father asked her to come home , but she begged to remain . 
Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to , she felt his eyes upon her . 
Later on she recalled how she had asked her father to let her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress , that Helene had followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother 's love , and that she again met Anatole in the little sitting room . 
Helene had disappeared leaving them alone , and Anatole had taken her hand and said in a tender voice : `` I can not come to visit you but is it possible that I shall never see you ? 
I love you madly . 
Can I never ... ? '' 
and , blocking her path , he brought his face close to hers . 
His large , glittering , masculine eyes were so close to hers that she saw nothing but them . 
`` Natalie ? '' 
he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands being painfully pressed . 
`` Natalie ? '' 
`` I do n't understand . 
I have nothing to say , '' her eyes replied . 
Burning lips were pressed to hers , and at the same instant she felt herself released , and Helene 's footsteps and the rustle of her dress were heard in the room . 
Natasha looked round at her , and then , red and trembling , threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole and moved toward the door . 
`` One word , just one , for God 's sake ! '' 
cried Anatole . 
She paused . 
She so wanted a word from him that would explain to her what had happened and to which she could find no answer . 
`` Natalie , just a word , only one ! '' 
he kept repeating , evidently not knowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them . 
Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room . 
The Rostovs went away without staying for supper . 
After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night . 
She was tormented by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole or Prince Andrew . 
She loved Prince Andrew -- she remembered distinctly how deeply she loved him . 
But she also loved Anatole , of that there was no doubt . 
`` Else how could all this have happened ? '' 
thought she . 
`` If , after that , I could return his smile when saying good-by , if I was able to let it come to that , it means that I loved him from the first . 
It means that he is kind , noble , and splendid , and I could not help loving him . 
What am I to do if I love him and the other one too ? '' 
she asked herself , unable to find an answer to these terrible questions . 
Morning came with its cares and bustle . 
Everyone got up and began to move about and talk , dressmakers came again . 
Marya Dmitrievna appeared , and they were called to breakfast . 
Natasha kept looking uneasily at everybody with wide-open eyes , as if wishing to intercept every glance directed toward her , and tried to appear the same as usual . 
After breakfast , which was her best time , Marya Dmitrievna sat down in her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her . 
`` Well , friends , I have now thought the whole matter over and this is my advice , '' she began . 
`` Yesterday , as you know , I went to see Prince Bolkonski . 
Well , I had a talk with him ... . 
He took it into his head to begin shouting , but I am not one to be shouted down . 
I said what I had to say ! '' 
`` Well , and he ? '' 
asked the count . 
`` He ? 
He 's crazy ... he did not want to listen . 
But what 's the use of talking ? 
As it is we have worn the poor girl out , '' said Marya Dmitrievna . 
`` My advice to you is finish your business and go back home to Otradnoe ... and wait there . '' 
`` Oh , no ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha . 
`` Yes , go back , '' said Marya Dmitrievna , `` and wait there . 
If your betrothed comes here now -- there will be no avoiding a quarrel ; but alone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on to you . '' 
Count Rostov approved of this suggestion , appreciating its reasonableness . 
If the old man came round it would be all the better to visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on ; and if not , the wedding , against his wishes , could only be arranged at Otradnoe . 
