The Emperor , moreover , had with him not a commander in chief 's staff but the imperial headquarters staff . 
In attendance on him was the head of the imperial staff , Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski , as well as generals , imperial aides-de-camp , diplomatic officials , and a large number of foreigners , but not the army staff . 
Besides these , there were in attendance on the Emperor without any definite appointments : Arakcheev , the ex-Minister of War ; Count Bennigsen , the senior general in rank ; the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich ; Count Rumyantsev , the Chancellor ; Stein , a former Prussian minister ; Armfeldt , a Swedish general ; Pfuel , the chief author of the plan of campaign ; Paulucci , an adjutant general and Sardinian emigre ; Wolzogen -- and many others . 
Though these men had no military appointment in the army , their position gave them influence , and often a corps commander , or even the commander in chief , did not know in what capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen , the Grand Duke , Arakcheev , or Prince Volkonski , or was given this or that advice and did not know whether a certain order received in the form of advice emanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether it had to be executed or not . 
But this was only the external condition ; the essential significance of the presence of the Emperor and of all these people , from a courtier 's point of view -LRB- and in an Emperor 's vicinity all became courtiers -RRB- , was clear to everyone . 
It was this : the Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief , but disposed of all the armies ; the men around him were his assistants . 
Arakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as the sovereign 's bodyguard . 
Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilna province who appeared to be doing the honors of the district , but was in reality a good general , useful as an adviser and ready at hand to replace Barclay . 
The Grand Duke was there because it suited him to be . 
The ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice was useful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally . 
Armfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general full of self-confidence , a quality that always influenced Alexander . 
Paulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech . 
The adjutants general were there because they always accompanied the Emperor , and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawn up the plan of campaign against Napoleon and , having induced Alexander to believe in the efficacy of that plan , was directing the whole business of the war . 
With Pfuel was Wolzogen , who expressed Pfuel 's thoughts in a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself -LRB- who was a harsh , bookish theorist , self-confident to the point of despising everyone else -RRB- was able to do . 
Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new and unexpected ideas every day -- especially the foreigners , who did so with a boldness characteristic of people employed in a country not their own -- there were many secondary personages accompanying the army because their principals were there . 
Among the opinions and voices in this immense , restless , brilliant , and proud sphere , Prince Andrew noticed the following sharply defined subdivisions of and parties : The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents -- military theorists who believed in a science of war with immutable laws -- laws of oblique movements , outflankings , and so forth . 
Pfuel and his adherents demanded a retirement into the depths of the country in accordance with precise laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war , and they saw only barbarism , ignorance , or evil intention in every deviation from that theory . 
To this party belonged the foreign nobles , Wolzogen , Wintzingerode , and others , chiefly Germans . 
The second party was directly opposed to the first ; one extreme , as always happens , was met by representatives of the other . 
The members of this party were those who had demanded an advance from Vilna into Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans . 
Besides being advocates of bold action , this section also represented nationalism , which made them still more one-sided in the dispute . 
They were Russians : Bagration , Ermolov -LRB- who was beginning to come to the front -RRB- , and others . 
At that time a famous joke of Ermolov 's was being circulated , that as a great favor he had petitioned the Emperor to make him a German . 
The men of that party , remembering Suvorov , said that what one had to do was not to reason , or stick pins into maps , but to fight , beat the enemy , keep him out of Russia , and not let the army get discouraged . 
To the third party -- in which the Emperor had most confidence - belonged the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between the other two . 
The members of this party , chiefly civilians and to whom Arakcheev belonged , thought and said what men who have no convictions but wish to seem to have some generally say . 
They said that undoubtedly war , particularly against such a genius as Bonaparte -LRB- they called him Bonaparte now -RRB- , needs most deeply devised plans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuel was a genius , but at the same time it had to be acknowledged that the theorists are often one sided , and therefore one should not trust them absolutely , but should also listen to what Pfuel 's opponents and practical men of experience in warfare had to say , and then choose a middle course . 
They insisted on the retention of the camp at Drissa , according to Pfuel 's plan , but on changing the movements of the other armies . 
Though , by this course , neither one aim nor the other could be attained , yet it seemed best to the adherents of this third party . 
Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was the Tsarevich , who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz , where he had ridden out at the head of the Guards , in his casque and cavalry uniform as to a review , expecting to crush the French gallantly ; but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line had narrowly escaped amid the general confusion . 
The men of this party had both the quality and the defect of frankness in their opinions . 
They feared Napoleon , recognized his strength and their own weakness , and frankly said so . 
They said : `` Nothing but sorrow , shame , and ruin will come of all this ! 
We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shall abandon Drissa . 
The only reasonable thing left to do is to conclude peace as soon as possible , before we are turned out of Petersburg . '' 
This view was very general in the upper army circles and found support also in Petersburg and from the chancellor , Rumyantsev , who , for other reasons of state , was in favor of peace . 
The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclay de Tolly , not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander in chief . 
`` Be he what he may '' -LRB- they always began like that -RRB- , `` he is an honest , practical man and we have nobody better . 
Give him real power , for war can not be conducted successfully without unity of command , and he will show what he can do , as he did in Finland . 
If our army is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissa without suffering any defeats , we owe this entirely to Barclay . 
If Barclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost , for Bennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807 . '' 
The sixth party , the Bennigsenites , said , on the contrary , that at any rate there was no one more active and experienced than Bennigsen : `` and twist about as you may , you will have to come to Bennigsen eventually . 
Let the others make mistakes now ! '' 
said they , arguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reverse and an unbroken series of blunders . 
`` The more mistakes that are made the better . 
It will at any rate be understood all the sooner that things can not go on like this . 
What is wanted is not some Barclay or other , but a man like Bennigsen , who made his mark in 1807 , and to whom Napoleon himself did justice -- a man whose authority would be willingly recognized , and Bennigsen is the only such man . '' 
The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are always to be found , especially around young sovereigns , and of whom there were particularly many round Alexander -- generals and imperial aides-de-camp passionately devoted to the Emperor , not merely as a monarch but as a man , adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly , as Rostov had done in 1805 , and who saw in him not only all the virtues but all human capabilities as well . 
These men , though enchanted with the sovereign for refusing the command of the army , yet blamed him for such excessive modesty , and only desired and insisted that their adored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announce that he would place himself at the head of the army , gather round him a commander in chief 's staff , and , consulting experienced theoreticians and practical men where necessary , would himself lead the troops , whose spirits would thereby be raised to the highest pitch . 
The eighth and largest group , which in its enormous numbers was to the others as ninety-nine to one , consisted of men who desired neither peace nor war , neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissa or anywhere else , neither Barclay nor the Emperor , neither Pfuel nor Bennigsen , but only the one most essential thing -- as much advantage and pleasure for themselves as possible . 
In the troubled waters of conflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor 's headquarters , it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable at other times . 
A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative post would today agree with Pfuel , tomorrow with his opponent , and the day after , merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor , would declare that he had no opinion at all on the matter . 
Another who wished to gain some advantage would attract the Emperor 's attention by loudly advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the day before , and would dispute and shout at the council , beating his breast and challenging those who did not agree with him to duels , thereby proving that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good . 
A third , in the absence of opponents , between two councils would simply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services , well knowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him . 
A fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often come accidentally under the Emperor 's eye . 
A fifth , to achieve his long-cherished aim of dining with the Emperor , would stubbornly insist on the correctness or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and for this object would produce arguments more or less forcible and correct . 
All the men of this party were fishing for rubles , decorations , and promotions , and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock of imperial favor , and directly they noticed it turning in any direction , this whole drone population of the army began blowing hard that way , so that it was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere . 
Amid the uncertainties of the position , with the menace of serious danger giving a peculiarly threatening character to everything , amid this vortex of intrigue , egotism , conflict of views and feelings , and the diversity of race among these people -- this eighth and largest party of those preoccupied with personal interests imparted great confusion and obscurity to the common task . 
Whatever question arose , a swarm of these drones , without having finished their buzzing on a previous theme , flew over to the new one and by their hum drowned and obscured the voices of those who were disputing honestly . 
From among all these parties , just at the time Prince Andrew reached the army , another , a ninth party , was being formed and was beginning to raise its voice . 
This was the party of the elders , reasonable men experienced and capable in state affairs , who , without sharing any of those conflicting opinions , were able to take a detached view of what was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider means of escape from this muddle , indecision , intricacy , and weakness . 
The men of this party said and thought that what was wrong resulted chiefly from the Emperor 's presence in the army with his military court and from the consequent presence there of an indefinite , conditional , and unsteady fluctuation of relations , which is in place at court but harmful in an army ; that a sovereign should reign but not command the army , and that the only way out of the position would be for the Emperor and his court to leave the army ; that the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed the action of fifty thousand men required to secure his personal safety , and that the worst commander in chief if independent would be better than the very best one trammeled by the presence and authority of the monarch . 
Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa , Shishkov , the Secretary of State and one of the chief representatives of this party , wrote a letter to the Emperor which Arakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign . 
In this letter , availing himself of permission given him by the Emperor to discuss the general course of affairs , he respectfully suggested -- on the plea that it was necessary for the sovereign to arouse a warlike spirit in the people of the capital -- that the Emperor should leave the army . 
That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call to them to defend their country -- the very incitement which was the chief cause of Russia 's triumph in so far as it was produced by the Tsar 's personal presence in Moscow -- was suggested to the Emperor , and accepted by him , as a pretext for quitting the army . 
This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor when Barclay , one day at dinner , informed Bolkonski that the sovereign wished to see him personally , to question him about Turkey , and that Prince Andrew was to present himself at Bennigsen 's quarters at six that evening . 
News was received at the Emperor 's quarters that very day of a fresh movement by Napoleon which might endanger the army -- news subsequently found to be false . 
And that morning Colonel Michaud had ridden round the Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and had pointed out to him that this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel , and till then considered a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science which would ensure Napoleon 's destruction , was an absurdity , threatening the destruction of the Russian army . 
Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen 's quarters -- a country gentleman 's house of moderate size , situated on the very banks of the river . 
Neither Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there , but Chernyshev , the Emperor 's aide-de-camp , received Bolkonski and informed him that the Emperor , accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci , had gone a second time that day to inspect the fortifications of the Drissa camp , of the suitability of which serious doubts were beginning to be felt . 
Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a French novel in his hand . 
This room had probably been a music room ; there was still an organ in it on which some rugs were piled , and in one corner stood the folding bedstead of Bennigsen 's adjutant . 
This adjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding , evidently exhausted by work or by feasting . 
Two doors led from the room , one straight on into what had been the drawing room , and another , on the right , to the study . 
Through the first door came the sound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French . 
In that drawing room were gathered , by the Emperor 's wish , not a military council -LRB- the Emperor preferred indefiniteness -RRB- , but certain persons whose opinions he wished to know in view of the impending difficulties . 
It was not a council of war , but , as it were , a council to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor personally . 
To this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General Armfeldt , Adjutant General Wolzogen , Wintzingerode -LRB- whom Napoleon had referred to as a renegade French subject -RRB- , Michaud , Toll , Count Stein who was not a military man at all , and Pfuel himself , who , as Prince Andrew had heard , was the mainspring of the whole affair . 
Prince Andrew had an opportunity of getting a good look at him , for Pfuel arrived soon after himself and , in passing through to the drawing room , stopped a minute to speak to Chernyshev . 
At first sight , Pfuel , in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general , which fitted him badly like a fancy costume , seemed familiar to Prince Andrew , though he saw him now for the first time . 
There was about him something of Weyrother , Mack , and Schmidt , and many other German theorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805 , but he was more typical than any of them . 
Prince Andrew had never yet seen a German theorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were united to such an extent . 
Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned , of coarse , robust build , broad in the hips , and with prominent shoulder blades . 
His face was much wrinkled and his eyes deep set . 
His hair had evidently been hastily brushed smooth in front of the temples , but stuck up behind in quaint little tufts . 
He entered the room , looking restlessly and angrily around , as if afraid of everything in that large apartment . 
Awkwardly holding up his sword , he addressed Chernyshev and asked in German where the Emperor was . 
One could see that he wished to pass through the rooms as quickly as possible , finish with the bows and greetings , and sit down to business in front of a map , where he would feel at home . 
He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev , and smiled ironically on hearing that the sovereign was inspecting the fortifications that he , Pfuel , had planned in accord with his theory . 
He muttered something to himself abruptly and in a bass voice , as self-assured Germans do -- it might have been `` stupid fellow '' ... or `` the whole affair will be ruined , '' or `` something absurd will come of it . '' 
... Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passed on , but Chernyshev introduced him to Pfuel , remarking that Prince Andrew was just back from Turkey where the war had terminated so fortunately . 
Pfuel barely glanced -- not so much at Prince Andrew as past him -- and said , with a laugh : `` That must have been a fine tactical war '' ; and , laughing contemptuously , went on into the room from which the sound of voices was heard . 
Pfuel , always inclined to be irritably sarcastic , was particularly disturbed that day , evidently by the fact that they had dared to inspect and criticize his camp in his absence . 
From this short interview with Pfuel , Prince Andrew , thanks to his Austerlitz experiences , was able to form a clear conception of the man . 
Pfuel was one of those hopelessly and immutably self-confident men , self-confident to the point of martyrdom as only Germans are , because only Germans are self-confident on the basis of an abstract notion -- science , that is , the supposed knowledge of absolute truth . 
A Frenchman is self-assured because he regards himself personally , both in mind and body , as irresistibly attractive to men and women . 
An Englishman is self-assured , as being a citizen of the best-organized state in the world , and therefore as an Englishman always knows what he should do and knows that all he does as an Englishman is undoubtedly correct . 
An Italian is self-assured because he is excitable and easily forgets himself and other people . 
A Russian is self-assured just because he knows nothing does not want to know anything , since he does not believe that anything can be known . 
The German 's self-assurance is worst of all , stronger and more repulsive than any other , because he imagines that he knows the truth - science -- which he himself has invented but which is for him the absolute truth . 
