Amid the smoke , deafened by the incessant reports which always made him jump , Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun , now aiming , now counting the charges , now giving orders about replacing dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones , and shouting in his feeble voice , so high pitched and irresolute . 
His face grew more and more animated . 
Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn away from the sight , shouting angrily at the men who , as is always the case , hesitated about lifting the injured or dead . 
The soldiers , for the most part handsome fellows and , as is always the case in an artillery company , a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as their officer -- all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassing situation , and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on theirs . 
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and activity , Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of fear , and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never occurred to him . 
On the contrary , he became more and more elated . 
It seemed to him that it was a very long time ago , almost a day , since he had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot , and that the corner of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground . 
Though he thought of everything , considered everything , and did everything the best of officers could do in his position , he was in a state akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness . 
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him , the whistle and thud of the enemy 's cannon balls , from the flushed and perspiring faces of the crew bustling round the guns , from the sight of the blood of men and horses , from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy 's side -LRB- always followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth , a man , a gun , a horse -RRB- , from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded him pleasure . 
The enemy 's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker . 
`` There ... he 's puffing again , '' muttered Tushin to himself , as a small cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the left by the wind . 
`` Now look out for the ball ... we 'll throw it back . '' 
`` What do you want , your honor ? '' 
asked an artilleryman , standing close by , who heard him muttering . 
`` Nothing ... only a shell ... '' he answered . 
`` Come along , our Matvevna ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Matvevna '' * was the name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery , which was large and of an old pattern . 
The French swarming round their guns seemed to him like ants . 
In that world , the handsome drunkard Number One of the second gun 's crew was `` uncle '' ; Tushin looked at him more often than at anyone else and took delight in his every movement . 
The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill , now diminishing , now increasing , seemed like someone 's breathing . 
He listened intently to the ebb and flow of these sounds . 
* Daughter of Matthew . 
`` Ah ! 
Breathing again , breathing ! '' 
he muttered to himself . 
He imagined himself as an enormously tall , powerful man who was throwing cannon balls at the French with both hands . 
`` Now then , Matvevna , dear old lady , do n't let me down ! '' 
he was saying as he moved from the gun , when a strange , unfamiliar voice called above his head : `` Captain Tushin ! 
Captain ! '' 
Tushin turned round in dismay . 
It was the staff officer who had turned him out of the booth at Grunth . 
He was shouting in a gasping voice : `` Are you mad ? 
You have twice been ordered to retreat , and you ... '' `` Why are they down on me ? '' 
thought Tushin , looking in alarm at his superior . 
`` I. . . 
do n't ... '' he muttered , holding up two fingers to his cap . 
`` I. . . '' 
But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say . 
A cannon ball , flying close to him , caused him to duck and bend over his horse . 
He paused , and just as he was about to say something more , another ball stopped him . 
He turned his horse and galloped off . 
`` Retire ! 
All to retire ! '' 
he shouted from a distance . 
The soldiers laughed . 
A moment later , an adjutant arrived with the same order . 
It was Prince Andrew . 
The first thing he saw on riding up to the space where Tushin 's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with a broken leg , that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessed horses . 
Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring . 
Among the limbers lay several dead men . 
One ball after another passed over as he approached and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine . 
But the mere thought of being afraid roused him again . 
`` I can not be afraid , '' thought he , and dismounted slowly among the guns . 
He delivered the order and did not leave the battery . 
He decided to have the guns removed from their positions and withdrawn in his presence . 
Together with Tushin , stepping across the bodies and under a terrible fire from the French , he attended to the removal of the guns . 
`` A staff officer was here a minute ago , but skipped off , '' said an artilleryman to Prince Andrew . 
`` Not like your honor ! '' 
Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin . 
They were both so busy as to seem not to notice one another . 
When having limbered up the only two cannon that remained uninjured out of the four , they began moving down the hill -LRB- one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind -RRB- , Prince Andrew rode up to Tushin . 
`` Well , till we meet again ... '' he said , holding out his hand to Tushin . 
`` Good-by , my dear fellow , '' said Tushin . 
`` Dear soul ! 
Good-by , my dear fellow ! '' 
and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes . 
The wind had fallen and black clouds , merging with the powder smoke , hung low over the field of battle on the horizon . 
It was growing dark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous . 
The cannonade was dying down , but the rattle of musketry behind and on the right sounded oftener and nearer . 
As soon as Tushin with his guns , continually driving round or coming upon wounded men , was out of range of fire and had descended into the dip , he was met by some of the staff , among them the staff officer and Zherkov , who had been twice sent to Tushin 's battery but had never reached it . 
Interrupting one another , they all gave , and transmitted , orders as to how to proceed , reprimanding and reproaching him . 
Tushin gave no orders , and , silently -- fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weep without knowing why -- rode behind on his artillery nag . 
Though the orders were to abandon the wounded , many of them dragged themselves after troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages . 
The jaunty infantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin 's wattle shed was laid , with a bullet in his stomach , on `` Matvevna 's '' carriage . 
At the foot of the hill , a pale hussar cadet , supporting one hand with the other , came up to Tushin and asked for a seat . 
`` Captain , for God 's sake ! 
I 've hurt my arm , '' he said timidly . 
`` For God 's sake ... I ca n't walk . 
For God 's sake ! '' 
It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a lift and been refused . 
He asked in a hesitating , piteous voice . 
`` Tell them to give me a seat , for God 's sake ! '' 
`` Give him a seat , '' said Tushin . 
`` Lay a cloak for him to sit on , lad , '' he said , addressing his favorite soldier . 
`` And where is the wounded officer ? '' 
`` He has been set down . 
He died , '' replied someone . 
`` Help him up . 
Sit down , dear fellow , sit down ! 
Spread out the cloak , Antonov . '' 
The cadet was Rostov . 
With one hand he supported the other ; he was pale and his jaw trembled , shivering feverishly . 
He was placed on `` Matvevna , '' the gun from which they had removed the dead officer . 
The cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained his breeches and arm . 
`` What , are you wounded , my lad ? '' 
said Tushin , approaching the gun on which Rostov sat . 
`` No , it 's a sprain . '' 
`` Then what is this blood on the gun carriage ? '' 
inquired Tushin . 
