Anticipation that the failure of the Petersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led to dissatisfaction , contempt , and ridicule , more and more strongly expressed . 
The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in a respectful form , making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was to blame . 
They did not talk seriously to him ; when reporting to him or asking for his sanction they appeared to be fulfilling a regrettable formality , but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him at every turn . 
Because they could not understand him all these people assumed that it was useless to talk to the old man ; that he would never grasp the profundity of their plans , that he would answer with his phrases -LRB- which they thought were mere phrases -RRB- about a `` golden bridge , '' about the impossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowd of tatterdemalions , and so forth . 
They had heard all that before . 
And all he said -- that it was necessary to await provisions , or that the men had no boots -- was so simple , while what they proposed was so complicated and clever , that it was evident that he was old and stupid and that they , though not in power , were commanders of genius . 
After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral and Petersburg hero Wittgenstein , this mood and the gossip of the staff reached their maximum . 
Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shrugged his shoulders . 
Only once , after the affair of the Berezina , did he get angry and write to Bennigsen -LRB- who reported separately to the Emperor -RRB- the following letter : `` On account of your spells of ill health , will your excellency please be so good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this , and there await further commands and appointments from His Imperial Majesty . '' 
But after Bennigsen 's departure , the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich joined the army . 
He had taken part in the beginning of the campaign but had subsequently been removed from the army by Kutuzov . 
Now having come to the army , he informed Kutuzov of the Emperor 's displeasure at the poor success of our forces and the slowness of their advance . 
The Emperor intended to join the army personally in a few days ' time . 
The old man , experienced in court as well as in military affairs - this same Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander in chief against the sovereign 's wishes and who had removed the Grand Duke and heir -- apparent from the army -- who on his own authority and contrary to the Emperor 's will had decided on the abandonment of Moscow , now realized at once that his day was over , that his part was played , and that the power he was supposed to hold was no longer his . 
And he understood this not merely from the attitude of the court . 
He saw on the one hand that the military business in which he had played his part was ended and felt that his mission was accomplished ; and at the same time he began to be conscious of the physical weariness of his aged body and of the necessity of physical rest . 
On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna -- his `` dear Vilna '' as he called it . 
Twice during his career Kutuzov had been governor of Vilna . 
In that wealthy town , which had not been injured , he found old friends and associations , besides the comforts of life of which he had so long been deprived . 
And he suddenly turned from the cares of army and state and , as far as the passions that seethed around him allowed , immersed himself in the quiet life to which he had formerly been accustomed , as if all that was taking place and all that had still to be done in the realm of history did not concern him at all . 
Chichagov , one of the most zealous `` cutters-off '' and `` breakers-up , '' who had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greece and then in Warsaw but never wished to go where he was sent : Chichagov , noted for the boldness with which he spoke to the Emperor , and who considered Kutuzov to be under an obligation to him because when he was sent to make peace with Turkey in 1811 independently of Kutuzov , and found that peace had already been concluded , he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of securing that peace was really Kutuzov 's ; this Chichagov was the first to meet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay . 
In undress naval uniform , with a dirk , and holding his cap under his arm , he handed Kutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town . 
The contemptuously respectful attitude of the younger men to the old man in his dotage was expressed in the highest degree by the behavior of Chichagov , who knew of the accusations that were being directed against Kutuzov . 
When speaking to Chichagov , Kutuzov incidentally mentioned that the vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him at Borisov had been recovered and would be restored to him . 
`` You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of ... . 
On the contrary , I can supply you with everything even if you want to give dinner parties , '' warmly replied Chichagov , who tried by every word he spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutuzov to be animated by the same desire . 
Kutuzov , shrugging his shoulders , replied with his subtle penetrating smile : `` I meant merely to say what I said . '' 
Contrary to the Emperor 's wish Kutuzov detained the greater part of the army at Vilna . 
Those about him said that he became extraordinarily slack and physically feeble during his stay in that town . 
He attended to army affairs reluctantly , left everything to his generals , and while awaiting the Emperor 's arrival led a dissipated life . 
Having left Petersburg on the seventh of December with his suite - Count Tolstoy , Prince Volkonski , Arakcheev , and others -- the Emperor reached Vilna on the eleventh , and in his traveling sleigh drove straight to the castle . 
In spite of the severe frost some hundred generals and staff officers in full parade uniform stood in front of the castle , as well as a guard of honor of the Semenov regiment . 
A courier who galloped to the castle in advance , in a troyka with three foam-flecked horses , shouted `` Coming ! '' 
and Konovnitsyn rushed into the vestibule to inform Kutuzov , who was waiting in the hall porter 's little lodge . 
A minute later the old man 's large stout figure in full-dress uniform , his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round his stomach , waddled out into the porch . 
He put on his hat with its peaks to the sides and , holding his gloves in his hand and walking with an effort sideways down the steps to the level of the street , took in his hand the report he had prepared for the Emperor . 
There was running to and fro and whispering ; another troyka furiously up , and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleigh in which the figures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already be descried . 
From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitating effect on the old general . 
He carefully and hastily felt himself all over , readjusted his hat , and pulling himself together drew himself up and , at the very moment when the Emperor , having alighted from the sleigh , lifted his eyes to him , handed him the report and began speaking in his smooth , ingratiating voice . 
The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot , frowned for an instant , but immediately mastering himself went up to the old man , extended his arms and embraced him . 
And this embrace too , owing to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings , had its usual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob . 
The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard , and again pressing the old man 's hand went with him into the castle . 
When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed his dissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakes made at Krasnoe and the Berezina , and informed him of his intentions for a future campaign abroad . 
Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark . 
The same submissive , expressionless look with which he had listened to the Emperor 's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years before settled on his face now . 
When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head was crossing the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait , he was arrested by someone 's voice saying : `` Your Serene Highness ! '' 
Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes of Count Tolstoy , who stood before him holding a silver salver on which lay a small object . 
Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expected of him . 
Suddenly he seemed to remember ; a scarcely perceptible smile flashed across his puffy face , and bowing low and respectfully he took the object that lay on the salver . 
It was the Order of St. George of the First Class . 
Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which the Emperor honored by his presence . 
Kutuzov had received the Order of St. George of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highest honors , but everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him . 
The proprieties were observed and the Emperor was the first to set that example , but everybody understood that the old man was blameworthy and good-for-nothing . 
When Kutuzov , conforming to a custom of Catherine 's day , ordered the standards that had been captured to be lowered at the Emperor 's feet on his entering the ballroom , the Emperor made a wry face and muttered something in which some people caught the words , `` the old comedian . '' 
The Emperor 's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased at Vilna by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would not understand the importance of the coming campaign . 
When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officers assembled about him : `` You have not only saved Russia , you have saved Europe ! '' 
they all understood that the war was not ended . 
Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinion that no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory of Russia , but could only spoil and lower the glorious position that Russia had gained . 
He tried to prove to the Emperor the impossibility of levying fresh troops , spoke of the hardships already endured by the people , of the possibility of failure and so forth . 
This being the field marshal 's frame of mind he was naturally regarded as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war . 
To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man , the natural method was to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and with Barclay at the beginning of the Russian campaign -- to transfer the authority to the Emperor himself , thus cutting the ground from under the commander in chief 's feet without upsetting the old man by informing him of the change . 
With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and its real strength removed and transferred to the Emperor . 
Toll , Konovnitsyn , and Ermolov received fresh appointments . 
Everyone spoke loudly of the field marshal 's great weakness and failing health . 
His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given to another . 
And in fact his health was poor . 
So naturally , simply , and gradually -- just as he had come from Turkey to the Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia , and then to the army when he was needed there -- now when his part was played out , Kutuzov 's place was taken by a new and necessary performer . 
The war 1812 , besides its national significance dear to every Russian heart , was now to assume another , a European , significance . 
The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by a movement of peoples from east to west , and for this fresh war another leader was necessary , having qualities and views differing from Kutuzov 's and animated by different motives . 
Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples from east to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov had been for the salvation and glory of Russia . 
Kutuzov did not understand what Europe , the balance of power , or Napoleon meant . 
He could not understand it . 
For the representative of the Russian people , after the enemy had been destroyed and Russia had been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory , there was nothing left to do as a Russian . 
Nothing remained for the representative of the national war but to die , and Kutuzov died . 
As generally happens , Pierre did not feel the full effects of the physical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner until after they were over . 
After his liberation he reached Orel , and on the third day there , when preparing to go to Kiev , he fell ill and was laid up for three months . 
He had what the doctors termed `` bilious fever . '' 
But despite the fact that the doctors treated him , bled him , and gave him medicines to drink , he recovered . 
Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre 's mind by all that happened to him from the time of his rescue till his illness . 
He remembered only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy , internal physical distress , and pains in his feet and side . 
He remembered a general impression of the misfortunes and sufferings of people and of being worried by the curiosity of officers and generals who questioned him , he also remembered his difficulty in procuring a conveyance and horses , and above all he remembered his incapacity to think and feel all that time . 
On the day of his rescue he had seen the body of Petya Rostov . 
That same day he had learned that Prince Andrew , after surviving the battle of Borodino for more than a month had recently died in the Rostovs ' house at Yaroslavl , and Denisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene 's death , supposing that Pierre had heard of it long before . 
All this at the time seemed merely strange to Pierre : he felt he could not grasp its significance . 
Just then he was only anxious to get away as quickly as possible from places where people were killing one another , to some peaceful refuge where he could recover himself , rest , and think over all the strange new facts he had learned ; but on reaching Orel he immediately fell ill . 
When he came to himself after his illness he saw in attendance on him two of his servants , Terenty and Vaska , who had come from Moscow ; and also his cousin the eldest princess , who had been living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue and illness had come to look after him . 
It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre lost the impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few months and got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhere tomorrow , that no one would deprive him of his warm bed , and that he would be sure to get his dinner , tea , and supper . 
But for a long time in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions of captivity . 
In the same way little by little he came to understand the news he had been told after his rescue , about the death of Prince Andrew , the death of his wife , and the destruction of the French . 
A joyous feeling of freedom -- that complete inalienable freedom natural to man which he had first experienced at the first halt outside Moscow -- filled Pierre 's soul during his convalescence . 
He was surprised to find that this inner freedom , which was independent of external conditions , now had as it were an additional setting of external liberty . 
He was alone in a strange town , without acquaintances . 
No one demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere . 
He had all he wanted : the thought of his wife which had been a continual torment to him was no longer there , since she was no more . 
`` Oh , how good ! 
How splendid ! '' 
said he to himself when a cleanly laid table was moved up to him with savory beef tea , or when he lay down for the night on a soft clean bed , or when he remembered that the French had gone and that his wife was no more . 
`` Oh , how good , how splendid ! '' 
And by old habit he asked himself the question : `` Well , and what then ? 
What am I going to do ? '' 
