We can not accurately estimate his genius in Austria or Prussia , for we have to draw our information from French or German sources , and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps without fighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans to recognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried on in Germany . 
But we , thank God , have no need to recognize his genius in order to hide our shame . 
We have paid for the right to look at the matter plainly and simply , and we will not abandon that right . 
His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius as elsewhere . 
Order after order order and plan after plan were issued by him from the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it . 
The absence of citizens and of a deputation , and even the burning of Moscow , did not disconcert him . 
He did not lose sight either of the welfare of his army or of the doings of the enemy , or of the welfare of the people of Russia , or of the direction of affairs in Paris , or of diplomatic considerations concerning the terms of the anticipated peace . 
With regard to military matters , Napoleon immediately on his entry into Moscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe the movements of the Russian army , sent army corps out along the different roads , and charged Murat to find Kutuzov . 
Then he gave careful directions about the fortification of the Kremlin , and drew up a brilliant plan for a future campaign over the whole map of Russia . 
With regard to diplomatic questions , Napoleon summoned Captain Yakovlev , who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know how to get out of Moscow , minutely explained to him his whole policy and his magnanimity , and having written a letter to the Emperor Alexander in which he considered it his duty to inform his Friend and Brother that Rostopchin had managed affairs badly in Moscow , he dispatched Yakovlev to Petersburg . 
Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity to Tutolmin , he dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate . 
With regard to legal matters , immediately after the fires he gave orders to find and execute the incendiaries . 
And the scoundrel Rostopchin was punished by an order to burn down his houses . 
With regard to administrative matters , Moscow was granted a constitution . 
A municipality was established and the following announcement issued : INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW ! 
Your misfortunes are cruel , but His Majesty the Emperor and King desires to arrest their course . 
Terrible examples have taught you how he punishes disobedience and crime . 
Strict measures have been taken to put an end to disorder and to re-establish public security . 
A paternal administration , chosen from among yourselves , will form your municipality or city government . 
It will take care of you , of your needs , and of your welfare . 
Its members will be distinguished by a red ribbon worn across the shoulder , and the mayor of the city will wear a white belt as well . 
But when not on duty they will only wear a red ribbon round the left arm . 
The city police is established on its former footing , and better order already prevails in consequence of its activity . 
The government has appointed two commissaries general , or chiefs of police , and twenty commissaries or captains of wards have been appointed to the different wards of the city . 
You will recognize them by the white ribbon they will wear on the left arm . 
Several churches of different denominations are open , and divine service is performed in them unhindered . 
Your fellow citizens are returning every day to their homes . 
and orders have been given that they should find in them the help and protection due to their misfortunes . 
These are the measures the government has adopted to re-establish order and relieve your condition . 
But to achieve this aim it is necessary that you should add your efforts and should , if possible , forget the misfortunes you have suffered , should entertain the hope of a less cruel fate , should be certain that inevitable and ignominious death awaits those who make any attempt on your persons or on what remains of your property , and finally that you should not doubt that these will be safeguarded , since such is the will of the greatest and most just of monarchs . 
Soldiers and citizens , of whatever nation you may be , re-establish public confidence , the source of the welfare of a state , live like brothers , render mutual aid and protection one to another , unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded , obey the military and civil authorities , and your tears will soon cease to flow ! 
With regard to supplies for the army , Napoleon decreed that all the troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude * to obtain provisions for themselves , so that the army might have its future provided for . 
* As looters . 
With regard to religion , Napoleon ordered the priests to be brought back and services to be again performed in the churches . 
With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army , the following was placarded everywhere : PROCLAMATION ! 
You , peaceful inhabitants of Moscow , artisans and workmen whom misfortune has driven from the city , and you scattered tillers of the soil , still kept out in the fields by groundless fear , listen ! 
Tranquillity is returning to this capital and order is being restored in it . 
Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly from their hiding places on finding that they are respected . 
Any violence to them or to their property is promptly punished . 
His Majesty the Emperor and King protects them , and considers no one among you his enemy except those who disobey his orders . 
He desires to end your misfortunes and restore you to your homes and families . 
Respond , therefore , to his benevolent intentions and come to us without fear . 
Inhabitants , return with confidence to your abodes ! 
You will soon find means of satisfying your needs . 
Craftsmen and industrious artisans , return to your work , your houses , your shops , where the protection of guards awaits you ! 
You shall receive proper pay for your work . 
And lastly you too , peasants , come from the forests where you are hiding in terror , return to your huts without fear , in full assurance that you will find protection ! 
Markets are established in the city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and the products of the soil . 
The government has taken the following steps to ensure freedom of sale for them : -LRB- 1 -RRB- From today , peasants , husbandmen , and those living in the neighborhood of Moscow may without any danger bring their supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets , of which one is on the Mokhovaya Street and the other at the Provision Market . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Such supplies will be bought from them at such prices as seller and buyer may agree on , and if a seller is unable to obtain a fair price he will be free to take his goods back to his village and no one may hinder him under any pretense . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Sunday and Wednesday of each week are appointed as the chief market days and to that end a sufficient number of troops will be stationed along the highroads on Tuesdays and Saturdays at such distances from the town as to protect the carts . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- Similar measures will be taken that peasants with their carts and horses may meet with no hindrance on their return journey . 
-LRB- 5 -RRB- Steps will immediately be taken to re-establish ordinary trading . 
Inhabitants of the city and villages , and you , workingmen and artisans , to whatever nation you belong , you are called on to carry out the paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and to co-operate with him for the public welfare ! 
Lay your respect and confidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us ! 
With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of the people , reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed . 
The Emperor rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants , and , despite his preoccupation with state affairs , himself visited the theaters that were established by his order . 
In regard to philanthropy , the greatest virtue of crowned heads , Napoleon also did all in his power . 
He caused the words Maison de ma Mere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions , thereby combining tender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch . 
He visited the Foundling Hospital and , allowing the orphans saved by him to kiss his white hands , graciously conversed with Tutolmin . 
Then , as Thiers eloquently recounts , he ordered his soldiers to be paid in forged Russian money which he had prepared : `` Raising the use of these means by an act worthy of himself and of the French army , he let relief be distributed to those who had been burned out . 
But as food was too precious to be given to foreigners , who were for the most part enemies , Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which to purchase food from outside , and had paper rubles distributed to them . '' 
With reference to army discipline , orders were continually being issued to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of military duties and to suppress robbery . 
But strange to say , all these measures , efforts , and plans -- which were not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances -- did not affect the essence of the matter but , like the hands of a clock detached from the mechanism , swung about in an arbitrary and aimless way without engaging the cogwheels . 
With reference to the military side -- the plan of campaign -- that work of genius of which Thiers remarks that , `` His genius never devised anything more profound , more skillful , or more admirable , '' and enters into a polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of genius must be referred not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October - that plan never was or could be executed , for it was quite out of touch with the facts of the case . 
The fortifying of the Kremlin , for which la Mosquee -LRB- as Napoleon termed the church of Basil the Beatified -RRB- was to have been razed to the ground , proved quite useless . 
The mining of the Kremlin only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon 's wish that it should be blown up when he left Moscow -- as a child wants the floor on which he has hurt himself to be beaten . 
The pursuit of the Russian army , about which Napoleon was so concerned , produced an unheard-of result . 
The French generals lost touch with the Russian army of sixty thousand men , and according to Thiers it was only eventually found , like a lost pin , by the skill -- and apparently the genius -- of Murat . 
With reference to diplomacy , all Napoleon 's arguments as to his magnanimity and justice , both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev -LRB- whose chief concern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance -RRB- , proved useless ; Alexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to their embassage . 
With regard to legal matters , after the execution of the supposed incendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down . 
With regard to administrative matters , the establishment of a municipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certain people who formed part of that municipality and under pretext of preserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property from being looted . 
With regard to religion , as to which in Egypt matters had so easily been settled by Napoleon 's visit to a mosque , no results were achieved . 
Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try to carry out Napoleon 's wish , but one of them was slapped in the face by a French soldier while conducting service , and a French official reported of another that : `` The priest whom I found and invited to say Mass cleaned and locked up the church . 
That night the doors were again broken open , the padlocks smashed , the books mutilated , and other disorders perpetrated . '' 
With reference to commerce , the proclamation to industrious workmen and to peasants evoked no response . 
There were no industrious workmen , and the peasants caught the commissaries who ventured too far out of town with the proclamation and killed them . 
As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and the troops , these did not meet with success either . 
The theaters set up in the Kremlin and in Posnyakov 's house were closed again at once because the actors and actresses were robbed . 
Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect . 
The genuine as well as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value . 
The French , collecting booty , cared only for gold . 
Not only was the paper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed to the unfortunate , but even silver lost its value in relation to gold . 
But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the orders given by the authorities at that time was Napoleon 's attempt to stop the looting and re-establish discipline . 
This is what the army authorities were reporting : `` Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it . 
Order is not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on trade in a lawful manner . 
The sutlers alone venture to trade , and they sell stolen goods . '' 
`` The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers of the 3rd Corps who , not satisfied with taking from the unfortunate inhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left , even have the ferocity to wound them with their sabers , as I have repeatedly witnessed . '' 
`` Nothing new , except that the soldiers are robbing and pillaging - October 9 . '' 
`` Robbery and pillaging continue . 
There is a band of thieves in our district who ought to be arrested by a strong force -- October 11 . '' 
`` The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strict orders to stop pillage , parties of marauding Guards are continually seen returning to the Kremlin . 
Among the Old Guard disorder and pillage were renewed more violently than ever yesterday evening , last night , and today . 
The Emperor sees with regret that the picked soldiers appointed to guard his person , who should set an example of discipline , carry disobedience to such a point that they break into the cellars and stores containing army supplies . 
Others have disgraced themselves to the extent of disobeying sentinels and officers , and have abused and beaten them . '' 
`` The Grand Marshal of the palace , '' wrote the governor , `` complains bitterly that in spite of repeated orders , the soldiers continue to commit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windows of the Emperor . '' 
That army , like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoot the provender which might have saved it from starvation , disintegrated and perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow . 
But it did not go away . 
It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic caused by the capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road , and by the battle of Tarutino . 
The news of that battle of Tarutino , unexpectedly received by Napoleon at a review , evoked in him a desire to punish the Russians -LRB- Thiers says -RRB- , and he issued the order for departure which the whole army was demanding . 
