Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to the village and had already been sent for . 
`` Oh , but you were there ? '' 
said Prince Bagration , addressing Prince Andrew . 
`` Of course , we only just missed one another , '' said the staff officer , with a smile to Bolkonski . 
`` I had not the pleasure of seeing you , '' said Prince Andrew , coldly and abruptly . 
All were silent . 
Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his way timidly from behind the backs of the generals . 
As he stepped past the generals in the crowded hut , feeling embarrassed as he always was by the sight of his superiors , he did not notice the staff of the banner and stumbled over it . 
Several of those present laughed . 
`` How was it a gun was abandoned ? '' 
asked Bagration , frowning , not so much at the captain as at those who were laughing , among whom Zherkov laughed loudest . 
Only now , when he was confronted by the stern authorities , did his guilt and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining alive present themselves to Tushin in all their horror . 
He had been so excited that he had not thought about it until that moment . 
The officers ' laughter confused him still more . 
He stood before Bagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able to mutter : `` I do n't know ... your excellency ... I had no men ... your excellency . '' 
`` You might have taken some from the covering troops . '' 
Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops , though that was perfectly true . 
He was afraid of getting some other officer into trouble , and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy who has blundered looks at an examiner . 
The silence lasted some time . 
Prince Bagration , apparently not wishing to be severe , found nothing to say ; the others did not venture to intervene . 
Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his brows and his fingers twitched nervously . 
`` Your excellency ! '' 
Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abrupt voice , '' you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin 's battery . 
I went there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out , two guns smashed , and no supports at all . '' 
Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness at Bolkonski , who spoke with suppressed agitation . 
`` And , if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion , '' he continued , `` we owe today 's success chiefly to the action of that battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company , '' and without awaiting a reply , Prince Andrew rose and left the table . 
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin , evidently reluctant to show distrust in Bolkonski 's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully to credit it , bent his head , and told Tushin that he could go . 
Prince Andrew went out with him . 
`` Thank you ; you saved me , my dear fellow ! '' 
said Tushin . 
Prince Andrew gave him a look , but said nothing and went away . 
He felt sad and depressed . 
It was all so strange , so unlike what he had hoped . 
`` Who are they ? 
Why are they here ? 
What do they want ? 
And when will all this end ? '' 
thought Rostov , looking at the changing shadows before him . 
The pain in his arm became more and more intense . 
Irresistible drowsiness overpowered him , red rings danced before his eyes , and the impression of those voices and faces and a sense of loneliness merged with the physical pain . 
It was they , these soldiers - wounded and unwounded -- it was they who were crushing , weighing down , and twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained arm and shoulder . 
To rid himself of them he closed his eyes . 
For a moment he dozed , but in that short interval innumerable things appeared to him in a dream : his mother and her large white hand , Sonya 's thin little shoulders , Natasha 's eyes and laughter , Denisov with his voice and mustache , and Telyanin and all that affair with Telyanin and Bogdanich . 
That affair was the same thing as this soldier with the harsh voice , and it was that affair and this soldier that were so agonizingly , incessantly pulling and pressing his arm and always dragging it in one direction . 
He tried to get away from them , but they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair 's breadth . 
It would not ache -- it would be well -- if only they did not pull it , but it was impossible to get rid of them . 
He opened his eyes and looked up . 
The black canopy of night hung less than a yard above the glow of the charcoal . 
Flakes of falling snow were fluttering in that light . 
Tushin had not returned , the doctor had not come . 
He was alone now , except for a soldier who was sitting naked at the other side of the fire , warming his thin yellow body . 
`` Nobody wants me ! '' 
thought Rostov . 
`` There is no one to help me or pity me . 
Yet I was once at home , strong , happy , and loved . '' 
He sighed and , doing so , groaned involuntarily . 
`` Eh , is anything hurting you ? '' 
asked the soldier , shaking his shirt out over the fire , and not waiting for an answer he gave a grunt and added : `` What a lot of men have been crippled today -- frightful ! '' 
Rostov did not listen to the soldier . 
He looked at the snowflakes fluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm , bright home , his fluffy fur coat , his quickly gliding sleigh , his healthy body , and all the affection and care of his family . 
`` And why did I come here ? '' 
he wondered . 
Next day the French army did not renew their attack , and the remnant of Bagration 's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov 's army . 
Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out his plans . 
Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his own advantage . 
He was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whom getting on had become a habit . 
Schemes and devices for which he never rightly accounted to himself , but which formed the whole interest of his life , were constantly shaping themselves in his mind , arising from the circumstances and persons he met . 
Of these plans he had not merely one or two in his head but dozens , some only beginning to form themselves , some approaching achievement , and some in course of disintegration . 
He did not , for instance , say to himself : `` This man now has influence , I must gain his confidence and friendship and through him obtain a special grant . '' 
Nor did he say to himself : `` Pierre is a rich man , I must entice him to marry my daughter and lend me the forty thousand rubles I need . '' 
But when he came across a man of position his instinct immediately told him that this man could be useful , and without any premeditation Prince Vasili took the first opportunity to gain his confidence , flatter him , become intimate with him , and finally make his request . 
He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him an appointment as Gentleman of the Bedchamber , which at that time conferred the status of Councilor of State , and insisted on the young man accompanying him to Petersburg and staying at his house . 
With apparent absent-mindedness , yet with unhesitating assurance that he was doing the right thing , Prince Vasili did everything to get Pierre to marry his daughter . 
Had he thought out his plans beforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffected familiarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below him in social standing . 
Something always drew him toward those richer and more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in seizing the most opportune moment for making use of people . 
Pierre , on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man , felt himself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so beset and preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself . 
He had to sign papers , to present himself at government offices , the purpose of which was not clear to him , to question his chief steward , to visit his estate near Moscow , and to receive many people who formerly did not even wish to know of his existence but would now have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to see them . 
These different people -- businessmen , relations , and acquaintances alike -- were all disposed to treat the young heir in the most friendly and flattering manner : they were all evidently firmly convinced of Pierre 's noble qualities . 
He was always hearing such words as : `` With your remarkable kindness , '' or , `` With your excellent heart , '' `` You are yourself so honorable Count , '' or , `` Were he as clever as you , '' and so on , till he began sincerely to believe in his own exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence , the more so as in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that he really was very kind and intelligent . 
Even people who had formerly been spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentle and affectionate . 
The angry eldest princess , with the long waist and hair plastered down like a doll 's , had come into Pierre 's room after the funeral . 
With drooping eyes and frequent blushes she told him she was very sorry about their past misunderstandings and did not now feel she had a right to ask him for anything , except only for permission , after the blow she had received , to remain for a few weeks longer in the house she so loved and where she had sacrificed so much . 
She could not refrain from weeping at these words . 
Touched that this statuesque princess could so change , Pierre took her hand and begged her forgiveness , without knowing what for . 
From that day the eldest princess quite changed toward Pierre and began knitting a striped scarf for him . 
`` Do this for my sake , mon cher ; after all , she had to put up with a great deal from the deceased , '' said Prince Vasili to him , handing him a deed to sign for the princess ' benefit . 
Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary to throw this bone -- a bill for thirty thousand rubles -- to the poor princess that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in the affair of the inlaid portfolio . 
Pierre signed the deed and after that the princess grew still kinder . 
The younger sisters also became affectionate to him , especially the youngest , the pretty one with the mole , who often made him feel confused by her smiles and her own confusion when meeting him . 
It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him , and it would have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him , that he could not but believe in the sincerity of those around him . 
Besides , he had no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere or not . 
He was always busy and always felt in a state of mild and cheerful intoxication . 
He felt as though he were the center of some important and general movement ; that something was constantly expected of him , that if he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint many people , but if he did this and that , all would be well ; and he did what was demanded of him , but still that happy result always remained in the future . 
More than anyone else , Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre 's affairs and of Pierre himself in those early days . 
From the death of Count Bezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad . 
He had the air of a man oppressed by business , weary and suffering , who yet would not , for pity 's sake , leave this helpless youth who , after all , was the son of his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth , to the caprice of fate and the designs of rogues . 
During the few days he spent in Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov , he would call Pierre , or go to him himself , and tell him what ought to be done in a tone of weariness and assurance , as if he were adding every time : `` You know I am overwhelmed with business and it is purely out of charity that I trouble myself about you , and you also know quite well that what I propose is the only thing possible . '' 
`` Well , my dear fellow , tomorrow we are off at last , '' said Prince Vasili one day , closing his eyes and fingering Pierre 's elbow , speaking as if he were saying something which had long since been agreed upon and could not now be altered . 
`` We start tomorrow and I 'm giving you a place in my carriage . 
I am very glad . 
