Wait a moment ! '' 
Anatole 's face seemed to say . 
Princess Mary looked at them in silence . 
She could not understand it . 
At last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away . 
Anatole bowed to Princess Mary with a gay smile , as if inviting her to join in a laugh at this strange incident , and then shrugging his shoulders went to the door that led to his own apartments . 
An hour later , Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the old prince ; he added that Prince Vasili was also there . 
When Tikhon came to her Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room , holding the weeping Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking her hair . 
The princess ' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radiance were looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselle Bourienne 's pretty face . 
`` No , Princess , I have lost your affection forever ! '' 
said Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` Why ? 
I love you more than ever , '' said Princess Mary , `` and I will try to do all I can for your happiness . '' 
`` But you despise me . 
You who are so pure can never understand being so carried away by passion . 
Oh , only my poor mother ... '' `` I quite understand , '' answered Princess Mary , with a sad smile . 
`` Calm yourself , my dear . 
I will go to my father , '' she said , and went out . 
Prince Vasili , with one leg thrown high over the other and a snuffbox in his hand , was sitting there with a smile of deep emotion on his face , as if stirred to his heart 's core and himself regretting and laughing at his own sensibility , when Princess Mary entered . 
He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff . 
`` Ah , my dear , my dear ! '' 
he began , rising and taking her by both hands . 
Then , sighing , he added : `` My son 's fate is in your hands . 
Decide , my dear , good , gentle Marie , whom I have always loved as a daughter ! '' 
He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye . 
`` Fr ... fr ... '' snorted Prince Bolkonski . 
`` The prince is making a proposition to you in his pupil 's -- I mean , his son 's -- name . 
Do you wish or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin 's wife ? 
Reply : yes or no , '' he shouted , `` and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also . 
Yes , my opinion , and only my opinion , '' added Prince Bolkonski , turning to Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look . 
`` Yes , or no ? '' 
`` My desire is never to leave you , Father , never to separate my life from yours . 
I do n't wish to marry , '' she answered positively , glancing at Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes . 
`` Humbug ! 
Nonsense ! 
Humbug , humbug , humbug ! '' 
cried Prince Bolkonski , frowning and taking his daughter 's hand ; he did not kiss her , but only bending his forehead to hers just touched it , and pressed her hand so that she winced and uttered a cry . 
Prince Vasili rose . 
`` My dear , I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never , never forget . 
But , my dear , will you not give us a little hope of touching this heart , so kind and generous ? 
Say ` perhaps ' ... The future is so long . 
Say ` perhaps . ' '' 
`` Prince , what I have said is all there is in my heart . 
I thank you for the honor , but I shall never be your son 's wife . '' 
`` Well , so that 's finished , my dear fellow ! 
I am very glad to have seen you . 
Very glad ! 
Go back to your rooms , Princess . 
Go ! '' 
said the old prince . 
`` Very , very glad to have seen you , '' repeated he , embracing Prince Vasili . 
`` My vocation is a different one , '' thought Princess Mary . 
`` My vocation is to be happy with another kind of happiness , the happiness of love and self-sacrifice . 
And cost what it may , I will arrange poor Amelie 's happiness , she loves him so passionately , and so passionately repents . 
I will do all I can to arrange the match between them . 
If he is not rich I will give her the means ; I will ask my father and Andrew . 
I shall be so happy when she is his wife . 
She is so unfortunate , a stranger , alone , helpless ! 
And , oh God , how passionately she must love him if she could so far forget herself ! 
Perhaps I might have done the same ! 
... '' thought Princess Mary . 
It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas . 
Not till midwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son 's handwriting . 
On receiving it , he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarm and haste , trying to escape notice , closed the door , and began to read the letter . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , who always knew everything that passed in the house , on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into the room and found the count with it in his hand , sobbing and laughing at the same time . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , though her circumstances had improved , was still living with the Rostovs . 
`` My dear friend ? '' 
said she , in a tone of pathetic inquiry , prepared to sympathize in any way . 
The count sobbed yet more . 
`` Nikolenka ... a letter ... wa ... a. . . 
s. . . 
wounded ... my darling boy ... the countess ... promoted to be an officer ... thank God ... How tell the little countess ! '' 
Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him , with her own handkerchief wiped the tears from his eyes and from the letter , then having dried her own eyes she comforted the count , and decided that at dinner and till teatime she would prepare the countess , and after tea , with God 's help , would inform her . 
At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the war news and about Nikolenka , twice asked when the last letter had been received from him , though she knew that already , and remarked that they might very likely be getting a letter from him that day . 
Each time that these hints began to make the countess anxious and she glanced uneasily at the count and at Anna Mikhaylovna , the latter very adroitly turned the conversation to insignificant matters . 
Natasha , who , of the whole family , was the most gifted with a capacity to feel any shades of intonation , look , and expression , pricked up her ears from the beginning of the meal and was certain that there was some secret between her father and Anna Mikhaylovna , that it had something to do with her brother , and that Anna Mikhaylovna was preparing them for it . 
Bold as she was , Natasha , who knew how sensitive her mother was to anything relating to Nikolenka , did not venture to ask any questions at dinner , but she was too excited to eat anything and kept wriggling about on her chair regardless of her governess ' remarks . 
After dinner , she rushed head long after Anna Mikhaylovna and , dashing at her , flung herself on her neck as soon as she overtook her in the sitting room . 
`` Auntie , darling , do tell me what it is ! '' 
`` Nothing , my dear . '' 
`` No , dearest , sweet one , honey , I wo n't give up -- I know you know something . '' 
Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head . 
`` You are a little slyboots , '' she said . 
`` A letter from Nikolenka ! 
I 'm sure of it ! '' 
exclaimed Natasha , reading confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna 's face . 
`` But for God 's sake , be careful , you know how it may affect your mamma . '' 
`` I will , I will , only tell me ! 
You wo n't ? 
Then I will go and tell at once . '' 
Anna Mikhaylovna , in a few words , told her the contents of the letter , on condition that she should tell no one . 
`` No , on my true word of honor , '' said Natasha , crossing herself , `` I wo n't tell anyone ! '' 
and she ran off at once to Sonya . 
`` Nikolenka ... wounded ... a letter , '' she announced in gleeful triumph . 
`` Nicholas ! '' 
was all Sonya said , instantly turning white . 
Natasha , seeing the impression the of her brother 's wound produced on Sonya , felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news . 
She rushed to Sonya , hugged her , and began to cry . 
`` A little wound , but he has been made an officer ; he is well now , he wrote himself , '' said she through her tears . 
`` There now ! 
