She closed them but did not kiss them , but clung to that which reminded her most nearly of him -- his body . 
`` Where has he gone ? 
Where is he now ? 
... '' When the body , washed and dressed , lay in the coffin on a table , everyone came to take leave of him and they all wept . 
Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painful perplexity . 
The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha and because he was no more . 
The old count cried because he felt that before long , he , too , must take the same terrible step . 
Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now , but not because of their own personal grief ; they wept with a reverent and softening emotion which had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness of the simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished in their presence . 
Man 's mind can not grasp the causes of events in their completeness , but the desire to find those causes is implanted in man 's soul . 
And without considering the multiplicity and complexity of the conditions any one of which taken separately may seem to be the cause , he snatches at the first approximation to a cause that seems to him intelligible and says : `` This is the cause ! '' 
In historical events -LRB- where the actions of men are the subject of observation -RRB- the first and most primitive approximation to present itself was the will of the gods and , after that , the will of those who stood in the most prominent position -- the heroes of history . 
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event -- which lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it -- to be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled . 
It may seem to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of historical events this way or that ; yet there is the same difference between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because it had to happen , as there is between those who declared that the earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth , but knew there were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets . 
There is , and can be , no cause of an historical event except the one cause of all causes . 
But there are laws directing events , and some of these laws are known to us while we are conscious of others we can not comprehend . 
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man , just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the earth . 
The historians consider that , next to the battle of Borodino and the occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire , the most important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp -- the so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River . 
They ascribe the glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to whom the honor is due . 
Even foreign historians , including the French , acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of that flank march . 
But it is hard to understand why military writers , and following them others , consider this flank march to be the profound conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon . 
In the first place it is hard to understand where the profundity and genius of this movement lay , for not much mental effort was needed to see that the best position for an army when it is not being attacked is where there are most provisions ; and even a dull boy of thirteen could have guessed that the best position for an army after its retreat from Moscow in 1812 was on the Kaluga road . 
So it is impossible to understand by what reasoning the historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver was a profound one . 
And it is even more difficult to understand just why they think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia and destroy the French ; for this flank march , had it been preceded , accompanied , or followed by other circumstances , might have proved ruinous to the Russians and salutary for the French . 
If the position of the Russian army really began to improve from the time of that march , it does not at all follow that the march was the cause of it . 
That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage to the Russian army , but might in other circumstances have led to its destruction . 
What would have happened had Moscow not burned down ? 
If Murat had not lost sight of the Russians ? 
If Napoleon had not remained inactive ? 
If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle as Bennigsen and Barclay advised ? 
What would have happened had the French attacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra ? 
What would have happened if on approaching Tarutino , Napoleon had attacked the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown when he attacked them at Smolensk ? 
What would have happened had the French moved on Petersburg ? 
... In any of these eventualities the flank march that brought salvation might have proved disastrous . 
The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studying history deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march can not be attributed to any one man , that no one ever foresaw it , and that in reality , like the retreat from Fili , it did not suggest itself to anyone in its entirety , but resulted -- moment by moment , step by step , event by event -- from an endless number of most diverse circumstances and was only seen in its entirety when it had been accomplished and belonged to the past . 
At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of the Russian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself , namely , a direct retreat by the Nizhni road . 
In proof of this there is the fact that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat , and above all there is the well-known conversation after the council , between the commander in chief and Lanskoy , who was in charge of the commissariat department . 
Lanskoy informed the commander in chief that the army supplies were for the most part stored along the Oka in the Tula and Ryazan provinces , and that if they retreated on Nizhni the army would be separated from its supplies by the broad river Oka , which can not be crossed early in winter . 
This was the first indication of the necessity of deviating from what had previously seemed the most natural course -- a direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod . 
The army turned more to the south , along the Ryazan road and nearer to its supplies . 
Subsequently the inactivity of the French -LRB- who even lost sight of the Russian army -RRB- , concern for the safety of the arsenal at Tula , and especially the advantages of drawing nearer to its supplies caused the army to turn still further south to the Tula road . 
Having crossed over , by a forced march , to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra , the Russian commanders intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino position ; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians , and projects of giving battle , and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga province , obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino , which was between the roads along which those supplies lay . 
Just as it is impossible to say when it was decided to abandon Moscow , so it is impossible to say precisely when , or by whom , it was decided to move to Tarutino . 
Only when the army had got there , as the result of innumerable and varying forces , did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this movement and long ago foreseen its result . 
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this : after the advance of the French had ceased , the Russian army , which had been continually retreating straight back from the invaders , deviated from that direct course and , not finding itself pursued , was naturally drawn toward the district where supplies were abundant . 
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the Russian army , we picture that army without any leaders , it could not have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow , describing an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where the country was richest . 
That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan , Tula , and Kaluga roads was so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction , and demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that way . 
At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road , and the Emperor 's letter indicated to him the very position he had already occupied near Kaluga . 
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino , the Russian army - when the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was received -- assumed the position natural to it . 
Kutuzov 's merit lay , not in any strategic maneuver of genius , as it is called , but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of what had happened . 
He alone then understood the meaning of the French army 's inactivity , he alone continued to assert that the battle of Borodino had been a victory , he alone -- who as commander in chief might have been expected to be eager to attack -- employed his whole strength to restrain the Russian army from useless engagements . 
The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter had left him ; but whether he was still alive , whether he was strong and merely lying low , the hunter did not know . 
Suddenly the beast was heard to moan . 
The moan of that wounded beast -LRB- the French army -RRB- which betrayed its calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov 's camp with overtures for peace . 
Napoleon , with his usual assurance that whatever entered his head was right , wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him , though they were meaningless . 
MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV : I am sending one of my adjutants-general to discuss several interesting questions with you . 
I beg your Highness to credit what he says to you , especially when he expresses the sentiment of esteem and special regard I have long entertained for your person . 
This letter having no other object , I pray God , monsieur le Prince Koutouzov , to keep you in His holy and gracious protection ! 
NAPOLEON MOSCOW , OCTOBER 30 , 1812 Kutuzov replied : `` I should be cursed by posterity were I looked on as the initiator of a settlement of any sort . 
Such is the present spirit of my nation . '' 
But he continued to exert all his powers to restrain his troops from attacking . 
During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow and the Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino , a change had taken place in the relative strength of the two armies -- both in spirit and in number -- as a result of which the superiority had passed to the Russian side . 
Though the condition and numbers of the French army were unknown to the Russians , as soon as that change occurred the need of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs . 
These signs were : Lauriston 's mission ; the abundance of provisions at Tarutino ; the reports coming in from all sides of the inactivity and disorder of the French ; the flow of recruits to our regiments ; the fine weather ; the long rest the Russian soldiers had enjoyed , and the impatience to do what they had been assembled for , which usually shows itself in an army that has been resting ; curiosity as to what the French army , so long lost sight of , was doing ; the boldness with which our outposts now scouted close up to the French stationed at Tarutino ; the news of easy successes gained by peasants and guerrilla troops over the French , the envy aroused by this ; the desire for revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as the French were in Moscow , and -LRB- above all -RRB- a dim consciousness in every soldier 's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changed and that the advantage was now on our side . 
There was a substantial change in the relative strength , and an advance had become inevitable . 
And at once , as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as the minute hand has completed a full circle , this change was shown by an increased activity , whirring , and chiming in the higher spheres . 
The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff , and also by the Emperor from Petersburg . 
Before the news of the abandonment of Moscow had been received in Petersburg , a detailed plan of the whole campaign had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance . 
Though this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscow was still in our hands , it was approved by the staff and accepted as a basis for action . 
Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from a distance were always difficult to execute . 
So fresh instructions were sent for the solution of difficulties that might be encountered , as well as fresh people who were to watch Kutuzov 's actions and report upon them . 
Besides this , the whole staff of the Russian army was now reorganized . 
The posts left vacant by Bagration , who had been killed , and by Barclay , who had gone away in dudgeon , had to be filled . 
Very serious consideration was given to the question whether it would be better to put A in B 's place and B in D 's , or on the contrary to put D in A 's place , and so on -- as if anything more than A 's or B 's satisfaction depended on this . 
As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen , his Chief of Staff , the presence of confidential representatives of the Emperor , and these transfers , a more than usually complicated play of parties was going on among the staff of the army . 
A was undermining B , D was undermining C , and so on in all possible combinations and permutations . 
In all these plottings the subject of intrigue was generally the conduct of the war , which all these men believed they were directing ; but this affair of the war went on independently of them , as it had to go : that is , never in the way people devised , but flowing always from the essential attitude of the masses . 
Only in the highest spheres did all these schemes , crossings , and interminglings appear to be a true reflection of what had to happen . 
Prince Michael Ilarionovich ! 
-LRB- wrote the Emperor on the second of October in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino -RRB- Since September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy . 
Your last reports were written on the twentieth , and during all this time not only has no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief of the ancient capital , but according to your last report you have even retreated farther . 
Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemy detachment and Tula with its famous arsenal so indispensable to the army , is in danger . 
From General Wintzingerode 's reports , I see that an enemy corps of ten thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road . 
Another corps of several thousand men is moving on Dmitrov . 
A third has advanced along the Vladimir road , and a fourth , rather considerable detachment is stationed between Ruza and Mozhaysk . 
Napoleon himself was in Moscow as late as the twenty-fifth . 
In view of all this information , when the enemy has scattered his forces in large detachments , and with Napoleon and his Guards in Moscow , is it possible that the enemy 's forces confronting you are so considerable as not to allow of your taking the offensive ? 
On the contrary , he is probably pursuing you with detachments , or at most with an army corps much weaker than the army entrusted to you . 
It would seem that , availing yourself of these circumstances , you might advantageously attack a weaker one and annihilate him , or at least oblige him to retreat , retaining in our hands an important part of the provinces now occupied by the enemy , and thereby averting danger from Tula and other towns in the interior . 
You will be responsible if the enemy is able to direct a force of any size against Petersburg to threaten this capital in which it has not been possible to retain many troops ; for with the army entrusted to you , and acting with resolution and energy , you have ample means to avert this fresh calamity . 
Remember that you have still to answer to our offended country for the loss of Moscow . 
You have experienced my readiness to reward you . 
That readiness will not weaken in me , but I and Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal , firmness , and success which your intellect , military talent , and the courage of the troops you command justify us in expecting . 
But by the time this letter , which proved that the real relation of the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg , was dispatched , Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrain the army he commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place . 
On the second of October a Cossack , Shapovalov , who was out scouting , killed one hare and wounded another . 
Following the wounded hare he made his way far into the forest and came upon the left flank of Murat 's army , encamped there without any precautions . 
The Cossack laughingly told his comrades how he had almost fallen into the hands of the French . 
A cornet , hearing the story , informed his commander . 
The Cossack was sent for and questioned . 
The Cossack officers wished to take advantage of this chance to capture some horses , but one of the superior officers , who was acquainted with the higher authorities , reported the incident to a general on the staff . 
The state of things on the staff had of late been exceedingly strained . 
