`` Where is the Emperor ? 
Where is Kutuzov ? '' 
Rostov kept asking everyone he could stop , but got no answer from anyone . 
At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer . 
`` Eh , brother ! 
They 've all bolted long ago ! '' 
said the soldier , laughing for some reason and shaking himself free . 
Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk , Rostov stopped the horse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began to question him . 
The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in a carriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road and that he was dangerously wounded . 
`` It ca n't be ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` It must have been someone else . '' 
`` I saw him myself . '' 
replied the man with a self-confident smile of derision . 
`` I ought to know the Emperor by now , after the times I 've seen him in Petersburg . 
I saw him just as I see you ... . 
There he sat in the carriage as pale as anything . 
How they made the four black horses fly ! 
Gracious me , they did rattle past ! 
It 's time I knew the Imperial horses and Ilya Ivanych . 
I do n't think Ilya drives anyone except the Tsar ! '' 
Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on , when a wounded officer passing by addressed him : `` Who is it you want ? '' 
he asked . 
`` The commander in chief ? 
He was killed by a cannon ball -- struck in the breast before our regiment . '' 
`` Not killed -- wounded ! '' 
another officer corrected him . 
`` Who ? 
Kutuzov ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` Not Kutuzov , but what 's his name -- well , never mind ... there are not many left alive . 
Go that way , to that village , all the commanders are there , '' said the officer , pointing to the village of Hosjeradek , and he walked on . 
Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was now going . 
The Emperor was wounded , the battle lost . 
It was impossible to doubt it now . 
Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him , in which he saw turrets and a church . 
What need to hurry ? 
What was he now to say to the Tsar or to Kutuzov , even if they were alive and unwounded ? 
`` Take this road , your honor , that way you will be killed at once ! '' 
a soldier shouted to him . 
`` They 'd kill you there ! '' 
`` Oh , what are you talking about ? '' 
said another . 
`` Where is he to go ? 
That way is nearer . '' 
Rostov considered , and then went in the direction where they said he would be killed . 
`` It 's all the same now . 
If the Emperor is wounded , am I to try to save myself ? '' 
he thought . 
He rode on to the region where the greatest number of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen . 
The French had not yet occupied that region , and the Russians -- the uninjured and slightly wounded -- had left it long ago . 
All about the field , like heaps of manure on well-kept plowland , lay from ten to fifteen dead and wounded to each couple of acres . 
The wounded crept together in twos and threes and one could hear their distressing screams and groans , sometimes feigned -- or so it seemed to Rostov . 
He put his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all these suffering men , and he felt afraid -- afraid not for his life , but for the courage he needed and which he knew would not stand the sight of these unfortunates . 
The French , who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead and wounded where there was no one left to fire at , on seeing an adjutant riding over it trained a gun on him and fired several shots . 
The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of the corpses around him merged in Rostov 's mind into a single feeling of terror and pity for himself . 
He remembered his mother 's last letter . 
`` What would she feel , '' thought he , `` if she saw me here now on this field with the cannon aimed at me ? '' 
In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring from the field of battle , who though still in some confusion were less disordered . 
The French cannon did not reach there and the musketry fire sounded far away . 
Here everyone clearly saw and said that the battle was lost . 
No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where the Emperor or Kutuzov was . 
Some said the report that the Emperor was wounded was correct , others that it was not , and explained the false rumor that had spread by the fact that the Emperor 's carriage had really galloped from the field of battle with the pale and terrified Ober-Hofmarschal Count Tolstoy , who had ridden out to the battlefield with others in the Emperor 's suite . 
One officer told Rostov that he had seen someone from headquarters behind the village to the left , and thither Rostov rode , not hoping to find anyone but merely to ease his conscience . 
When he had ridden about two miles and had passed the last of the Russian troops , he saw , near a kitchen garden with a ditch round it , two men on horseback facing the ditch . 
One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar to Rostov ; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse -LRB- which Rostov fancied he had seen before -RRB- rode up to the ditch , struck his horse with his spurs , and giving it the rein leaped lightly over . 
Only a little earth crumbled from the bank under the horse 's hind hoofs . 
Turning the horse sharply , he again jumped the ditch , and deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes , evidently suggesting that he should do the same . 
The rider , whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted his attention , made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and by that gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adored monarch . 
`` But it ca n't be he , alone in the midst of this empty field ! '' 
thought Rostov . 
At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory . 
The Emperor was pale , his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow , but the charm , the mildness of his features , was all the greater . 
Rostov was happy in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being wounded were false . 
He was happy to be seeing him . 
He knew that he might and even ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov had ordered him to deliver . 
But as a youth in love trembles , is unnerved , and dares not utter the thoughts he has dreamed of for nights , but looks around for help or a chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes and he is alone with her , so Rostov , now that he had attained what he had longed for more than anything else in the world , did not know how to approach the Emperor , and a thousand reasons occurred to him why it would be inconvenient , unseemly , and impossible to do so . 
`` What ! 
It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage of his being alone and despondent ! 
A strange face may seem unpleasant or painful to him at this moment of sorrow ; besides , what can I say to him now , when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mere sight of him ? '' 
Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to the Emperor that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall . 
Those speeches were intended for quite other conditions , they were for the most part to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph , generally when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thanked him for heroic deeds , and while dying he expressed the love his actions had proved . 
`` Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for the right flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost ? 
No , certainly I must not approach him , I must not intrude on his reflections . 
Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkind look or bad opinion from him , '' Rostov decided ; and sorrowfully and with a heart full despair he rode away , continually looking back at the Tsar , who still remained in the same attitude of indecision . 
While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away , Captain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot , and seeing the Emperor at once rode up to him , offered his services , and assisted him to cross the ditch on foot . 
The Emperor , wishing to rest and feeling unwell , sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him . 
Rostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spoke long and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor , evidently weeping , covered his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll 's hand . 
`` And I might have been in his place ! '' 
thought Rostov , and hardly restraining his tears of pity for the Emperor , he rode on in utter despair , not knowing where to or why he was now riding . 
His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weakness was the cause his grief . 
He might ... not only might but should , have gone up to the sovereign . 
It was a unique chance to show his devotion to the Emperor and he had not made use of it ... `` What have I done ? '' 
thought he . 
And he turned round and galloped back to the place where he had seen the Emperor , but there was no one beyond the ditch now . 
Only some carts and carriages were passing by . 
From one of the drivers he learned that Kutuzov 's staff were not far off , in the village the vehicles were going to . 
Rostov followed them . 
In front of him walked Kutuzov 's groom leading horses in horsecloths . 
Then came a cart , and behind that walked an old , bandy-legged domestic serf in a peaked cap and sheepskin coat . 
