And how he has remembered everybody ! 
Not forgetting anyone . 
I always said when he was only so high -- I always said ... '' For more than a week preparations were being made , rough drafts of letters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copied out , while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude of the count , money and all things necessary for the uniform and equipment of the newly commissioned officer were collected . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , practical woman that she was , had even managed by favor with army authorities to secure advantageous means of communication for herself and her son . 
She had opportunities of sending her letters to the Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich , who commanded the Guards . 
The Rostovs supposed that The Russian Guards , Abroad , was quite a definite address , and that if a letter reached the Grand Duke in command of the Guards there was no reason why it should not reach the Pavlograd regiment , which was presumably somewhere in the same neighborhood . 
And so it was decided to send the letters and money by the Grand Duke 's courier to Boris and Boris was to forward them to Nicholas . 
The letters were from the old count , the countess , Petya , Vera , Natasha , and Sonya , and finally there were six thousand rubles for his outfit and various other things the old count sent to his son . 
On the twelfth of November , Kutuzov 's active army , in camp before Olmutz , was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors -- the Russian and the Austrian . 
The Guards , just arrived from Russia , spent the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to come straight to the review , reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock . 
That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris , telling him that the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten miles from Olmutz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and money for him . 
Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops , after their active service , were stationed near Olmutz and the camp swarmed with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering all sorts of tempting wares . 
The Pavlograds held feast after feast , celebrating awards they had received for the campaign , and made expeditions to Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian , who had recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses . 
Rostov , who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and bought Denisov 's horse , Bedouin , was in debt all round , to his comrades and the sutlers . 
On receiving Boris ' letter he rode with a fellow officer to Olmutz , dined there , drank a bottle of wine , and then set off alone to the Guards ' camp to find his old playmate . 
Rostov had not yet had time to get his uniform . 
He had on a shabby cadet jacket , decorated with a soldier 's cross , equally shabby cadet 's riding breeches lined with worn leather , and an officer 's saber with a sword knot . 
The Don horse he was riding was one he had bought from a Cossack during the campaign , and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuck jauntily back on one side of his head . 
As he rode up to the camp he thought how he would impress Boris and all his comrades of the Guards by his appearance -- that of a fighting hussar who had been under fire . 
The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip , parading their cleanliness and discipline . 
They had come by easy stages , their knapsacks conveyed on carts , and the Austrian authorities had provided excellent dinners for the officers at every halting place . 
The regiments had entered and left the town with their bands playing , and by the Grand Duke 's orders the men had marched all the way in step -LRB- a practice on which the Guards prided themselves -RRB- , the officers on foot and at their proper posts . 
Boris had been quartered , and had marched all the way , with Berg who was already in command of a company . 
Berg , who had obtained his captaincy during the campaign , had gained the confidence of his superiors by his promptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money matters very satisfactorily . 
Boris , during the campaign , had made the acquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him , and by a letter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had become acquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski , through whom he hoped to obtain a post on the commander in chief 's staff . 
Berg and Boris , having rested after yesterday 's march , were sitting , clean and neatly dressed , at a round table in the clean quarters allotted to them , playing chess . 
Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees . 
Boris , in the accurate way characteristic of him , was building a little pyramid of chessmen with his delicate white fingers while awaiting Berg 's move , and watched his opponent 's face , evidently thinking about the game as he always thought only of whatever he was engaged on . 
`` Well , how are you going to get out of that ? '' 
he remarked . 
`` We 'll try to , '' replied Berg , touching a pawn and then removing his hand . 
At that moment the door opened . 
`` Here he is at last ! '' 
shouted Rostov . 
`` And Berg too ! 
Oh , you petisenfans , allay cushay dormir ! '' 
he exclaimed , imitating his Russian nurse 's French , at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago . 
`` Dear me , how you have changed ! '' 
Boris rose to meet Rostov , but in doing so did not omit to steady and replace some chessmen that were falling . 
He was about to embrace his friend , but Nicholas avoided him . 
With that peculiar feeling of youth , that dread of beaten tracks , and wish to express itself in a manner different from that of its elders which is often insincere , Nicholas wished to do something special on meeting his friend . 
He wanted to pinch him , push him , do anything but kiss him -- a thing everybody did . 
But notwithstanding this , Boris embraced him in a quiet , friendly way and kissed him three times . 
They had not met for nearly half a year and , being at the age when young men take their first steps on life 's road , each saw immense changes in the other , quite a new reflection of the society in which they had taken those first steps . 
Both had changed greatly since they last met and both were in a hurry to show the changes that had taken place in them . 
`` Oh , you damned dandies ! 
Clean and fresh as if you 'd been to a fete , not like us sinners of the line , '' cried Rostov , with martial swagger and with baritone notes in his voice , new to Boris , pointing to his own mud-bespattered breeches . 
The German landlady , hearing Rostov 's loud voice , popped her head in at the door . 
`` Eh , is she pretty ? '' 
he asked with a wink . 
`` Why do you shout so ? 
You 'll frighten them ! '' 
said Boris . 
`` I did not expect you today , '' he added . 
`` I only sent you the note yesterday by Bolkonski -- an adjutant of Kutuzov 's , who 's a friend of mine . 
I did not think he would get it to you so quickly ... . 
Well , how are you ? 
Been under fire already ? '' 
asked Boris . 
Without answering , Rostov shook the soldier 's Cross of St. George fastened to the cording of his uniform and , indicating a bandaged arm , glanced at Berg with a smile . 
`` As you see , '' he said . 
`` Indeed ? 
Yes , yes ! '' 
said Boris , with a smile . 
`` And we too have had a splendid march . 
You know , of course , that His Imperial Highness rode with our regiment all the time , so that we had every comfort and every advantage . 
What receptions we had in Poland ! 
What dinners and balls ! 
I ca n't tell you . 
And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all our officers . '' 
And the two friends told each other of their doings , the one of his hussar revels and life in the fighting line , the other of the pleasures and advantages of service under members of the Imperial family . 
`` Oh , you Guards ! '' 
said Rostov . 
`` I say , send for some wine . '' 
Boris made a grimace . 
`` If you really want it , '' said he . 
He went to his bed , drew a purse from under the clean pillow , and sent for wine . 
`` Yes , and I have some money and a letter to give you , '' he added . 
Rostov took the letter and , throwing the money on the sofa , put both arms on the table and began to read . 
After reading a few lines , he glanced angrily at Berg , then , meeting his eyes , hid his face behind the letter . 
`` Well , they 've sent you a tidy sum , '' said Berg , eying the heavy purse that sank into the sofa . 
`` As for us , Count , we get along on our pay . 
I can tell you for myself ... '' `` I say , Berg , my dear fellow , '' said Rostov , `` when you get a letter from home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talk everything over with , and I happen to be there , I 'll go at once , to be out of your way ! 
Do go somewhere , anywhere ... to the devil ! '' 
he exclaimed , and immediately seizing him by the shoulder and looking amiably into his face , evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of his words , he added , `` Do n't be hurt , my dear fellow ; you know I speak from my heart as to an old acquaintance . '' 
`` Oh , do n't mention it , Count ! 
I quite understand , '' said Berg , getting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice . 
`` Go across to our hosts : they invited you , '' added Boris . 
Berg put on the cleanest of coats , without a spot or speck of dust , stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his temples upwards , in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander , and , having assured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat had been noticed , left the room with a pleasant smile . 
`` Oh dear , what a beast I am ! '' 
muttered Rostov , as he read the letter . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Oh , what a pig I am , not to have written and to have given them such a fright ! 
Oh , what a pig I am ! '' 
he repeated , flushing suddenly . 
`` Well , have you sent Gabriel for some wine ? 
All right let 's have some ! '' 
In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter of recommendation to Bagration which the old countess at Anna Mikhaylovna 's advice had obtained through an acquaintance and sent to her son , asking him to take it to its destination and make use of it . 
`` What nonsense ! 
Much I need it ! '' 
