`` What ? 
Saw the real Mack ? 
With hands and feet ? '' 
`` Into action ! 
Into action ! 
Bring him a bottle for such news ! 
But how did you come here ? '' 
`` I 've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil , Mack . 
An Austrian general complained of me . 
I congratulated him on Mack 's arrival ... What 's the matter , Rostov ? 
You look as if you 'd just come out of a hot bath . '' 
`` Oh , my dear fellow , we 're in such a stew here these last two days . '' 
The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov . 
They were under orders to advance next day . 
`` We 're going into action , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Well , thank God ! 
We 've been sitting here too long ! '' 
Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna , destroying behind him the bridges over the rivers Inn -LRB- at Braunau -RRB- and Traun -LRB- near Linz -RRB- . 
On October 23 the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns . 
At midday the Russian baggage train , the artillery , and columns of troops were defiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge . 
It was a warm , rainy , autumnal day . 
The wide expanse that opened out before the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding the bridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain , and then , suddenly spread out in the sunlight , far-distant objects could be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished . 
Down below , the little town could be seen with its white , red-roofed houses , its cathedral , and its bridge , on both sides of which streamed jostling masses of Russian troops . 
At the bend of the Danube , vessels , an island , and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of the confluence of the Enns and the Danube became visible , and the rocky left bank of the Danube covered with pine forests , with a mystic background of green treetops and bluish gorges . 
The turrets of a convent stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest , and far away on the other side of the Enns the enemy 's horse patrols could be discerned . 
Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general in command of the rearguard stood with a staff officer , scanning the country through his fieldglass . 
A little behind them Nesvitski , who had been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief , was sitting on the trail of a gun carriage . 
A Cossack who accompanied him had handed him a knapsack and a flask , and Nesvitski was treating some officers to pies and real doppelkummel . 
The officers gladly gathered round him , some on their knees , some squatting Turkish fashion on the wet grass . 
`` Yes , the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool . 
It 's a fine place ! 
Why are you not eating anything , gentlemen ? '' 
Nesvitski was saying . 
`` Thank you very much , Prince , '' answered one of the officers , pleased to be talking to a staff officer of such importance . 
`` It 's a lovely place ! 
We passed close to the park and saw two deer ... and what a splendid house ! '' 
`` Look , Prince , '' said another , who would have dearly liked to take another pie but felt shy , and therefore pretended to be examining the countryside -- `` See , our infantrymen have already got there . 
Look there in the meadow behind the village , three of them are dragging something . 
They 'll ransack that castle , '' he remarked with evident approval . 
`` So they will , '' said Nesvitski . 
`` No , but what I should like , '' added he , munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth , `` would be to slip in over there . '' 
He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery , and his eyes narrowed and gleamed . 
`` That would be fine , gentlemen ! '' 
The officers laughed . 
`` Just to flutter the nuns a bit . 
They say there are Italian girls among them . 
On my word I 'd give five years of my life for it ! '' 
`` They must be feeling dull , too , '' said one of the bolder officers , laughing . 
Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed out something to the general , who looked through his field glass . 
`` Yes , so it is , so it is , '' said the general angrily , lowering the field glass and shrugging his shoulders , `` so it is ! 
They 'll be fired on at the crossing . 
And why are they dawdling there ? '' 
On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye , and from their battery a milk-white cloud arose . 
Then came the distant report of a shot , and our troops could be seen hurrying to the crossing . 
Nesvitski rose , puffing , and went up to the general , smiling . 
`` Would not your excellency like a little refreshment ? '' 
he said . 
`` It 's a bad business , '' said the general without answering him , `` our men have been wasting time . '' 
`` Had n't I better ride over , your excellency ? '' 
asked Nesvitski . 
`` Yes , please do , '' answered the general , and he repeated the order that had already once been given in detail : `` and tell the hussars that they are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered ; and the inflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected . '' 
`` Very good , '' answered Nesvitski . 
He called the Cossack with his horse , told him to put away the knapsack and flask , and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle . 
`` I 'll really call in on the nuns , '' he said to the officers who watched him smilingly , and he rode off by the winding path down the hill . 
`` Now then , let 's see how far it will carry , Captain . 
Just try ! '' 
said the general , turning to an artillery officer . 
`` Have a little fun to pass the time . '' 
`` Crew , to your guns ! '' 
commanded the officer . 
In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires and began loading . 
`` One ! '' 
came the command . 
Number one jumped briskly aside . 
The gun rang out with a deafening metallic roar , and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of our troops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy , a little smoke showing the spot where it burst . 
The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound . 
Everyone got up and began watching the movements of our troops below , as plainly visible as if but a stone 's throw away , and the movements of the approaching enemy farther off . 
At the same instant the sun came fully out from behind the clouds , and the clear sound of the solitary shot and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in a single joyous and spirited impression . 
Two of the enemy 's shots had already flown across the bridge , where there was a crush . 
Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski , who had alighted from his horse and whose big body was jammed against the railings . 
He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood a few steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles . 
Each time Prince Nesvitski tried to move on , soldiers and carts pushed him back again and pressed him against the railings , and all he could do was to smile . 
`` What a fine fellow you are , friend ! '' 
said the Cossack to a convoy soldier with a wagon , who was pressing onto the infantrymen who were crowded together close to his wheels and his horses . 
`` What a fellow ! 
You ca n't wait a moment ! 
Do n't you see the general wants to pass ? '' 
But the convoyman took no notice of the word `` general '' and shouted at the soldiers who were blocking his way . 
`` Hi there , boys ! 
Keep to the left ! 
Wait a bit . '' 
But the soldiers , crowded together shoulder to shoulder , their bayonets interlocking , moved over the bridge in a dense mass . 
Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw the rapid , noisy little waves of the Enns , which rippling and eddying round the piles of the bridge chased each other along . 
Looking on the bridge he saw equally uniform living waves of soldiers , shoulder straps , covered shakos , knapsacks , bayonets , long muskets , and , under the shakos , faces with broad cheekbones , sunken cheeks , and listless tired expressions , and feet that moved through the sticky mud that covered the planks of the bridge . 
Sometimes through the monotonous waves of men , like a fleck of white foam on the waves of the Enns , an officer , in a cloak and with a type of face different from that of the men , squeezed his way along ; sometimes like a chip of wood whirling in the river , an hussar on foot , an orderly , or a townsman was carried through the waves of infantry ; and sometimes like a log floating down the river , an officers ' or company 's baggage wagon , piled high , leather covered , and hemmed in on all sides , moved across the bridge . 
`` It 's as if a dam had burst , '' said the Cossack hopelessly . 
`` Are there many more of you to come ? '' 
`` A million all but one ! '' 
replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat , with a wink , and passed on followed by another , an old man . 
`` If he '' -LRB- he meant the enemy -RRB- `` begins popping at the bridge now , '' said the old soldier dismally to a comrade , `` you 'll forget to scratch yourself . '' 
