`` Ah , that 's always the way ! '' 
said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand . 
`` How did you get here ? '' 
said he , turning to Zherkov . 
`` On the same business . 
But you are damp ! 
Let me wring you out ! '' 
`` You were saying , Mr. Staff Officer ... '' continued the colonel in an offended tone . 
`` Colonel , '' interrupted the officer of the suite , `` You must be quick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot . '' 
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite , at the stout staff officer , and at Zherkov , and he frowned . 
`` I will the bridge fire , '' he said in a solemn tone as if to announce that in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he would still do the right thing . 
Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were to blame for everything , the colonel moved forward and ordered the second squadron , that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov , to return to the bridge . 
`` There , it 's just as I thought , '' said Rostov to himself . 
`` He wishes to test me ! '' 
His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face . 
`` Let him see whether I am a coward ! '' 
he thought . 
Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expression appeared that they had worn when under fire . 
Rostov watched his enemy , the colonel , closely -- to find in his face confirmation of his own conjecture , but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov , and looked as he always did when at the front , solemn and stern . 
Then came the word of command . 
`` Look sharp ! 
Look sharp ! '' 
several voices repeated around him . 
Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling , the hussars hastily dismounted , not knowing what they were to do . 
The men were crossing themselves . 
Rostov no longer looked at the colonel , he had no time . 
He was afraid of falling behind the hussars , so much afraid that his heart stood still . 
His hand trembled as he gave his horse into an orderly 's charge , and he felt the blood rush to his heart with a thud . 
Denisov rode past him , leaning back and shouting something . 
Rostov saw nothing but the hussars running all around him , their spurs catching and their sabers clattering . 
`` Stretchers ! '' 
shouted someone behind him . 
Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant ; he ran on , trying only to be ahead of the others ; but just at the bridge , not looking at the ground , he came on some sticky , trodden mud , stumbled , and fell on his hands . 
The others outstripped him . 
`` At boss zides , Captain , '' he heard the voice of the colonel , who , having ridden ahead , had pulled up his horse near the bridge , with a triumphant , cheerful face . 
Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemy and was about to run on , thinking that the farther he went to the front the better . 
But Bogdanich , without looking at or recognizing Rostov , shouted to him : `` Who 's that running on the middle of the bridge ? 
To the right ! 
Come back , Cadet ! '' 
he cried angrily ; and turning to Denisov , who , showing off his courage , had ridden on to the planks of the bridge : `` Why run risks , Captain ? 
You should dismount , '' he said . 
`` Oh , every bullet has its billet , '' answered Vaska Denisov , turning in his saddle . 
Meanwhile Nesvitski , Zherkov , and the officer of the suite were standing together out of range of the shots , watching , now the small group of men with yellow shakos , dark-green jackets braided with cord , and blue riding breeches , who were swarming near the bridge , and then at what was approaching in the distance from the opposite side - the blue uniforms and groups with horses , easily recognizable as artillery . 
`` Will they burn the bridge or not ? 
Who 'll get there first ? 
Will they get there and fire the bridge or will the French get within grapeshot range and wipe them out ? '' 
These were the questions each man of the troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarily asked himself with a sinking heart -- watching the bridge and the hussars in the bright evening light and the blue tunics advancing from the other side with their bayonets and guns . 
`` Ugh . 
The hussars will get it hot ! '' 
said Nesvitski ; `` they are within grapeshot range now . '' 
`` He should n't have taken so many men , '' said the officer of the suite . 
`` True enough , '' answered Nesvitski ; `` two smart fellows could have done the job just as well . '' 
`` Ah , your excellency , '' put in Zherkov , his eyes fixed on the hussars , but still with that naive air that made it impossible to know whether he was speaking in jest or in earnest . 
`` Ah , your excellency ! 
How you look at things ! 
Send two men ? 
And who then would give us the Vladimir medal and ribbon ? 
But now , even if they do get peppered , the squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon . 
Our Bogdanich knows how things are done . '' 
`` There now ! '' 
said the officer of the suite , `` that 's grapeshot . '' 
He pointed to the French guns , the limbers of which were being detached and hurriedly removed . 
On the French side , amid the groups with cannon , a cloud of smoke appeared , then a second and a third almost simultaneously , and at the moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen . 
Then two reports one after another , and a third . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain , seizing the officer of the suite by the arm . 
`` Look ! 
A man has fallen ! 
Fallen , fallen ! '' 
`` Two , I think . '' 
`` If I were Tsar I would never go to war , '' said Nesvitski , turning away . 
The French guns were hastily reloaded . 
The infantry in their blue uniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run . 
Smoke appeared again but at irregular intervals , and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto the bridge . 
But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happening there , as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it . 
The hussars had succeeded in setting it on fire and the French batteries were now firing at them , no longer to hinder them but because the guns were trained and there was someone to fire at . 
The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before the hussars got back to their horses . 
Two were misdirected and the shot went too high , but the last round fell in the midst of a group of hussars and knocked three of them over . 
Rostov , absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich , had paused on the bridge not knowing what to do . 
There was no one to hew down -LRB- as he had always imagined battles to himself -RRB- , nor could he help to fire the bridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him like the other soldiers . 
He stood looking about him , when suddenly he heard a rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt , and the hussar nearest to him fell against the rails with a groan . 
Rostov ran up to him with the others . 
Again someone shouted , `` Stretchers ! '' 
Four men seized the hussar and began lifting him . 
`` Oooh ! 
For Christ 's sake let me alone ! '' 
cried the wounded man , but still he was lifted and laid on the stretcher . 
Nicholas Rostov turned away and , as if searching for something , gazed into the distance , at the waters of the Danube , at the sky , and at the sun . 
How beautiful the sky looked ; how blue , how calm , and how deep ! 
How bright and glorious was the setting sun ! 
With what soft glitter the waters of the distant Danube shone . 
And fairer still were the faraway blue mountains beyond the river , the nunnery , the mysterious gorges , and the pine forests veiled in the mist of their summits ... There was peace and happiness ... `` I should wishing for nothing else , nothing , if only I were there , '' thought Rostov . 
`` In myself alone and in that sunshine there is so much happiness ; but here ... groans , suffering , fear , and this uncertainty and hurry ... There -- they are shouting again , and again are all running back somewhere , and I shall run with them , and it , death , is here above me and around ... Another instant and I shall never again see the sun , this water , that gorge ! 
... '' At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds , and other stretchers came into view before Rostov . 
And the fear of death and of the stretchers , and love of the sun and of life , all merged into one feeling of sickening agitation . 
`` O Lord God ! 
Thou who art in that heaven , save , forgive , and protect me ! '' 
Rostov whispered . 
The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses ; their voices sounded louder and calmer , the stretchers disappeared from sight . 
