Moreover , the Rostovs ' affairs were seriously embarrassed , as the suitor could not but know ; and above all , Vera was twenty-four , had been taken out everywhere , and though she was certainly good-looking and sensible , no one up to now had proposed to her . 
So they gave their consent . 
`` You see , '' said Berg to his comrade , whom he called `` friend '' only because he knew that everyone has friends , `` you see , I have considered it all , and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or if it were in any way unsuitable . 
But on the contrary , my papa and mamma are now provided for -- I have arranged that rent for them in the Baltic Provinces -- and I can live in Petersburg on my pay , and with her fortune and my good management we can get along nicely . 
I am not marrying for money -- I consider that dishonorable -- but a wife should bring her share and a husband his . 
I have my position in the service , she has connections and some means . 
In our times that is worth something , is n't it ? 
But above all , she is a handsome , estimable girl , and she loves me ... '' Berg blushed and smiled . 
`` And I love her , because her character is sensible and very good . 
Now the other sister , though they are the same family , is quite different -- an unpleasant character and has not the same intelligence . 
She is so ... you know ? 
... Unpleasant ... But my fiancee ! 
... Well , you will be coming , '' he was going to say , `` to dine , '' but changed his mind and said `` to take tea with us , '' and quickly doubling up his tongue he blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke , perfectly embodying his dream of happiness . 
After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents by Berg 's proposal , the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such times took possession of the family , but the rejoicing was external and insincere . 
In the family 's feeling toward this wedding a certain awkwardness and constraint was evident , as if they were ashamed of not having loved Vera sufficiently and of being so ready to get her off their hands . 
The old count felt this most . 
He would probably have been unable to state the cause of his embarrassment , but it resulted from the state of his affairs . 
He did not know at all how much he had , what his debts amounted to , or what dowry he could give Vera . 
When his daughters were born he had assigned to each of them , for her dowry , an estate with three hundred serfs ; but one of these estates had already been sold , and the other was mortgaged and the interest so much in arrears that it would have to be sold , so that it was impossible to give it to Vera . 
Nor had he any money . 
Berg had already been engaged a month , and only a week remained before the wedding , but the count had not yet decided in his own mind the question of the dowry , nor spoken to his wife about it . 
At one time the count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or of selling a forest , at another time of borrowing money on a note of hand . 
A few days before the wedding Berg entered the count 's study early one morning and , with a pleasant smile , respectfully asked his future father-in-law to let him know what Vera 's dowry would be . 
The count was so disconcerted by this long-foreseen inquiry that without consideration he gave the first reply that came into his head . 
`` I like your being businesslike about it ... . 
I like it . 
You shall be satisfied ... '' And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up , wishing to end the conversation . 
But Berg , smiling pleasantly , explained that if he did not know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive at least part of the dowry in advance , he would have to break matters off . 
`` Because , consider , Count -- if I allowed myself to marry now without having definite means to maintain my wife , I should be acting badly ... '' The conversation ended by the count , who wished to be generous and to avoid further importunity , saying that he would give a note of hand for eighty thousand rubles . 
Berg smiled meekly , kissed the count on the shoulder , and said that he was very grateful , but that it was impossible for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirty thousand in ready money . 
`` Or at least twenty thousand , Count , '' he added , `` and then a note of hand for only sixty thousand . '' 
`` Yes , yes , all right ! '' 
said the count hurriedly . 
`` Only excuse me , my dear fellow , I 'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand for eighty thousand as well . 
Yes , yes ! 
Kiss me . '' 
Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809 , the very year to which she had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed four years ago . 
Since then she had not seen him . 
Before Sonya and her mother , if Boris happened to be mentioned , she spoke quite freely of that episode as of some childish , long-forgotten matter that was not worth mentioning . 
But in the secret depths of her soul the question whether her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important , binding promise tormented her . 
Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had had not seen the Rostovs . 
He had been in Moscow several times , and had passed near Otradnoe , but had never been to see them . 
Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he not wish to see her , and this conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elders spoke of him . 
`` Nowadays old friends are not remembered , '' the countess would say when Boris was mentioned . 
Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently , seemed to hold herself with particular dignity , and always spoke rapturously and gratefully of the merits of her son and the brilliant career on which he had entered . 
When the Rostovs came to Petersburg Boris called on them . 
He drove to their house in some agitation . 
The memory of Natasha was his most poetic recollection . 
But he went with the firm intention of letting her and her parents feel that the childish relations between himself and Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him . 
He had a brilliant position in society thanks to his intimacy with Countess Bezukhova , a brilliant position in the service thanks to the patronage of an important personage whose complete confidence he enjoyed , and he was beginning to make plans for marrying one of the richest heiresses in Petersburg , plans which might very easily be realized . 
When he entered the Rostovs ' drawing room Natasha was in her own room . 
When she heard of his arrival she almost ran into the drawing room , flushed and beaming with a more than cordial smile . 
Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress , with dark eyes shining from under her curls and boisterous , childish laughter , as he had known her four years before ; and so he was taken aback when quite a different Natasha entered , and his face expressed rapturous astonishment . 
This expression on his face pleased Natasha . 
`` Well , do you recognize your little madcap playmate ? '' 
asked the countess . 
Boris kissed Natasha 's hand and said that he was astonished at the change in her . 
`` How handsome you have grown ! '' 
`` I should think so ! '' 
replied Natasha 's laughing eyes . 
`` And is Papa older ? '' 
she asked . 
Natasha sat down and , without joining in Boris ' conversation with the countess , silently and minutely studied her childhood 's suitor . 
He felt the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glanced at her occasionally . 
Boris ' uniform , spurs , tie , and the way his hair was brushed were all comme il faut and in the latest fashion . 
This Natasha noticed at once . 
He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess , arranging with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted his left hand like a skin , and he spoke with a particularly refined compression of his lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburg society , recalling with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscow acquaintances . 
It was not accidentally , Natasha felt , that he alluded , when speaking of the highest aristocracy , to an ambassador 's ball he had attended , and to invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S. All this time Natasha sat silent , glancing up at him from under her brows . 
This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more . 
He looked round more frequently toward her , and broke off in what he was saying . 
He did not stay more than ten minutes , then rose and took his leave . 
The same inquisitive , challenging , and rather mocking eyes still looked at him . 
After his first visit Boris said to himself that Natasha attracted him just as much as ever , but that he must not yield to that feeling , because to marry her , a girl almost without fortune , would mean ruin to his career , while to renew their former relations without intending to marry her would be dishonorable . 
Boris made up his mind to avoid meeting Natasha , but despite that resolution he called again a few days later and began calling often and spending whole days at the Rostovs ' . 
It seemed to him that he ought to have an explanation with Natasha and tell her that the old times must be forgotten , that in spite of everything ... she could not be his wife , that he had no means , and they would never let her marry him . 
But he failed to do so and felt awkward about entering on such an explanation . 
From day to day he became more and more entangled . 
It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was in love with Boris as of old . 
She sang him his favorite songs , showed him her album , making him write in it , did not allow him to allude to the past , letting it be understood how was the present ; and every day he went away in a fog , without having said what he meant to , and not knowing what he was doing or why he came , or how it would all end . 
He left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from her every day , and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs . 
One night when the old countess , in nightcap and dressing jacket , without her false curls , and with her poor little knob of hair showing under her white cotton cap , knelt sighing and groaning on a rug and bowing to the ground in prayer , her door creaked and Natasha , also in a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair in curlpapers , ran in . 
The countess -- her prayerful mood dispelled -- looked round and frowned . 
She was finishing her last prayer : `` Can it be that this couch will be my grave ? '' 
Natasha , flushed and eager , seeing her mother in prayer , suddenly checked her rush , half sat down , and unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself . 
Seeing that her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and , rapidly slipping one little foot against the other , pushed off her slippers and jumped onto the bed the countess had feared might become her grave . 
This couch was high , with a feather bed and five pillows each smaller than the one below . 
Natasha jumped on it , sank into the feather bed , rolled over to the wall , and began snuggling up the bedclothes as she settled down , raising her knees to her chin , kicking out and laughing almost inaudibly , now covering herself up head and all , and now peeping at her mother . 
The countess finished her prayers and came to the bed with a stern face , but seeing , that Natasha 's head was covered , she smiled in her kind , weak way . 
`` Now then , now then ! '' 
said she . 
`` Mamma , can we have a talk ? 
Yes ? '' 
said Natasha . 
`` Now , just one on your throat and another ... that 'll do ! '' 
And seizing her mother round the neck , she kissed her on the throat . 
In her behavior to her mother Natasha seemed rough , but she was so sensitive and tactful that however she clasped her mother she always managed to do it without hurting her or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased . 
`` Well , what is it tonight ? '' 
said the mother , having arranged her pillows and waited until Natasha , after turning over a couple of times , had settled down beside her under the quilt , spread out her arms , and assumed a serious expression . 
These visits of Natasha 's at night before the count returned from his club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother , and daughter . 
`` What is it tonight ? 
