His sobs ceased , he pointed to his eyes , and Tikhon , understanding him , wiped away the tears . 
Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of them could understand for a long time , till at last Tikhon understood and repeated it . 
Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words in the mood in which he had just been speaking . 
She thought he was speaking of Russia , or Prince Andrew , of herself , of his grandson , or of his own death , and so she could not guess his words . 
`` Put on your white dress . 
I like it , '' was what he said . 
Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder , and the doctor taking her arm led her out to the veranda , soothing her and trying to persuade her to prepare for her journey . 
When she had left the room the prince again began speaking about his son , about the war , and about the Emperor , angrily twitching his brows and raising his hoarse voice , and then he had a second and final stroke . 
Princess Mary stayed on the veranda . 
The day had cleared , it was hot and sunny . 
She could understand nothing , think of nothing and feel nothing , except passionate love for her father , love such as she thought she had never felt till that moment . 
She ran out sobbing into the garden and as far as the pond , along the avenues of young lime trees Prince Andrew had planted . 
`` Yes ... I. . . 
I. . . 
I wished for his death ! 
Yes , I wanted it to end quicker ... . 
I wished to be at peace ... . 
And what will become of me ? 
What use will peace be when he is no longer here ? '' 
Princess Mary murmured , pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing her hands to her bosom which heaved with convulsive sobs . 
When she had completed the tour of the garden , which brought her again to the house , she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne -- who had remained at Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it -- coming toward her with a stranger . 
This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district , who had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity for her prompt departure . 
Princess Mary listened without understanding him ; she led him to the house , offered him lunch , and sat down with him . 
Then , excusing herself , she went to the door of the old prince 's room . 
The doctor came out with an agitated face and said she could not enter . 
`` Go away , Princess ! 
Go away ... go away ! '' 
She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the foot of the slope by the pond , where no one could see her . 
She did not know how long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of a woman 's footsteps running along the path . 
She rose and saw Dunyasha her maid , who was evidently looking for her , and who stopped suddenly as if in alarm on seeing her mistress . 
`` Please come , Princess ... The Prince , '' said Dunyasha in a breaking voice . 
`` Immediately , I 'm coming , I 'm coming ! '' 
replied the princess hurriedly , not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying , and trying to avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house . 
`` Princess , it 's God 's will ! 
You must be prepared for everything , '' said the Marshal , meeting her at the house door . 
`` Let me alone ; it 's not true ! '' 
she cried angrily to him . 
The doctor tried to stop her . 
She pushed him aside and ran to her father 's door . 
`` Why are these people with frightened faces stopping me ? 
I do n't want any of them ! 
And what are they doing here ? '' 
she thought . 
She opened the door and the bright daylight in that previously darkened room startled her . 
In the room were her nurse and other women . 
They all drew back from the bed , making way for her . 
He was still lying on the bed as before , but the stern expression of his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold . 
`` No , he 's not dead -- it 's impossible ! '' 
she told herself and approached him , and repressing the terror that seized her , she pressed her lips to his cheek . 
But she stepped back immediately . 
All the force of the tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantly and was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there before her . 
`` No , he is no more ! 
He is not , but here where he was is something unfamiliar and hostile , some dreadful , terrifying , and repellent mystery ! '' 
And hiding her face in her hands , Princess Mary sank into the arms of the doctor , who held her up . 
In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what had been the prince , tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouth should not stiffen while open , and with another handkerchief tied together the legs that were already spreading apart . 
Then they dressed him in uniform with his decorations and placed his shriveled little body on a table . 
Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when , but it all got done as if of its own accord . 
Toward night candles were burning round his coffin , a pall was spread over it , the floor was strewn with sprays of juniper , a printed band was tucked in under his shriveled head , and in a corner of the room sat a chanter reading the psalms . 
Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse , so the inmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room round the coffin -- the Marshal , the village Elder , peasant women -- and all with fixed and frightened eyes , crossing themselves , bowed and kissed the old prince 's cold and stiffened hand . 
Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had always been absentees , and its peasants were of quite a different character from those of Bald Hills . 
They differed from them in speech , dress , and disposition . 
They were called steppe peasants . 
The old prince used to approve of them for their endurance at work when they came to Bald Hills to help with the harvest or to dig ponds , and ditches , but he disliked them for their boorishness . 
Prince Andrew 's last stay at Bogucharovo , when he introduced hospitals and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had to pay , had not softened their disposition but had on the contrary strengthened in them the traits of character the old prince called boorishness . 
Various obscure rumors were always current among them : at one time a rumor that they would all be enrolled as Cossacks ; at another of a new religion to which they were all to be converted ; then of some proclamation of the Tsar 's and of an oath to the Tsar Paul in 1797 -LRB- in connection with which it was rumored that freedom had been granted them but the landowners had stopped it -RRB- , then of Peter Fedorovich 's return to the throne in seven years ' time , when everything would be made free and so `` simple '' that there would be no restrictions . 
Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his invasion were connected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions of Antichrist , the end of the world , and `` pure freedom . '' 
In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging to the crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could work where they pleased . 
There were very few resident landlords in the neighborhood and also very few domestic or literate serfs , and in the lives of the peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrents in the life of the Russian people , the causes and meaning of which are so baffling to contemporaries , were more clearly and strongly noticeable than among others . 
One instance , which had occurred some twenty years before , was a movement among the peasants to emigrate to some unknown `` warm rivers . '' 
Hundreds of peasants , among them the Bogucharovo folk , suddenly began selling their cattle and moving in whole families toward the southeast . 
As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea , so these men with their wives and children streamed to the southeast , to parts where none of them had ever been . 
They set off in caravans , bought their freedom one by one or ran away , and drove or walked toward the `` warm rivers . '' 
Many of them were punished , some sent to Siberia , many died of cold and hunger on the road , many returned of their own accord , and the movement died down of itself just as it had sprung up , without apparent reason . 
But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely , unexpectedly , and at the same time simply , naturally , and forcibly . 
Now in 1812 , to anyone living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption . 
Alpatych , who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince 's death , noticed an agitation among the peasants , and that contrary to what was happening in the Bald Hills district , where over a radius of forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages to be devastated by the Cossacks , the peasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were , it was rumored , in touch with the French , received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand , and did not migrate . 
He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant Karp , who possessed great influence in the village commune and had recently been away driving a government transport , had returned with news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages , but that the French did not harm them . 
Alpatych also knew that on the previous day another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo , which was occupied by the French , a proclamation by a French general that no harm would be done to the inhabitants , and if they remained they would be paid for anything taken from them . 
As proof of this the peasant had brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes -LRB- he did not know that they were false -RRB- paid to him in advance for hay . 
More important still , Alpatych learned that on the morning of the very day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the princess ' luggage from Bogucharovo , there had been a village meeting at which it had been decided not to move but to wait . 
Yet there was no time to waste . 
On the fifteenth , the day of the old prince 's death , the Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary 's leaving at once , as it was becoming dangerous . 
He had told her that after the sixteenth he could not be responsible for what might happen . 
On the evening of the day the old prince died the Marshal went away , promising to return next day for the funeral . 
But this he was unable to do , for he received tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced , and had barely time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate . 
For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the village Elder , Dron , whom the old prince called by the diminutive `` Dronushka . '' 
Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasants who grow big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchanged till they are sixty or seventy , without a gray hair or the loss of a tooth , as straight and strong at sixty as at thirty . 
Soon after the migration to the `` warm rivers , '' in which he had taken part like the rest , Dron was made village Elder and overseer of Bogucharovo , and had since filled that post irreproachably for twenty-three years . 
The peasants feared him more than they did their master . 
The masters , both the old prince and the young , and the steward respected him and jestingly called him `` the Minister . '' 
During the whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill , never after sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown the least fatigue , and though he could not read he had never forgotten a single money account or the number of quarters of flour in any of the endless cartloads he sold for the prince , nor a single shock of the whole corn crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields . 
Alpatych , arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate , sent for his Dron on the day of the prince 's funeral and told him to have twelve horses got ready for the princess ' carriages and eighteen carts for the things to be removed from Bogucharovo . 
Though the peasants paid quitrent , Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made about complying with this order , for there were two hundred and thirty households at work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do . 
But on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent . 
Alpatych named certain peasants he knew , from whom he told him to take the carts . 
Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting . 
Alpatych named others , but they too , according to Dron , had no horses available : some horses were carting for the government , others were too weak , and others had died for want of fodder . 
It seemed that no horses could be had even for the carriages , much less for the carting . 
Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned . 
Just as Dron was a model village Elder , so Alpatych had not managed the prince 's estates for twenty years in vain . 
