`` My pet , whose name day it is . 
My dear pet ! '' 
`` Ma chere , there is a time for everything , '' said the countess with feigned severity . 
`` You spoil her , Ilya , '' she added , turning to her husband . 
`` How do you do , my dear ? 
I wish you many happy returns of your name day , '' said the visitor . 
`` What a charming child , '' she added , addressing the mother . 
This black-eyed , wide-mouthed girl , not pretty but full of life - with childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice , with black curls tossed backward , thin bare arms , little legs in lace-frilled drawers , and feet in low slippers -- was just at that charming age when a girl is no longer a child , though the child is not yet a young woman . 
Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother 's mantilla -- not paying the least attention to her severe remark -- and began to laugh . 
She laughed , and in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the folds of her frock . 
`` Do you see ? 
... My doll ... Mimi ... You see ... '' was all Natasha managed to utter -LRB- to her everything seemed funny -RRB- . 
She leaned against her mother and burst into such a loud , ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not help joining in . 
`` Now then , go away and take your monstrosity with you , '' said the mother , pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness , and turning to the visitor she added : `` She is my youngest girl . '' 
Natasha , raising her face for a moment from her mother 's mantilla , glanced up at her through tears of laughter , and again hid her face . 
The visitor , compelled to look on at this family scene , thought it necessary to take some part in it . 
`` Tell me , my dear , '' said she to Natasha , `` is Mimi a relation of yours ? 
A daughter , I suppose ? '' 
Natasha did not like the visitor 's tone of condescension to childish things . 
She did not reply , but looked at her seriously . 
Meanwhile the younger generation : Boris , the officer , Anna Mikhaylovna 's son ; Nicholas , the undergraduate , the count 's eldest son ; Sonya , the count 's fifteen-year-old niece , and little Petya , his youngest boy , had all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces . 
Evidently in the back rooms , from which they had dashed out so impetuously , the conversation had been more amusing than the drawing-room talk of society scandals , the weather , and Countess Apraksina . 
Now and then they glanced at one another , hardly able to suppress their laughter . 
The two young men , the student and the officer , friends from childhood , were of the same age and both handsome fellows , though not alike . 
Boris was tall and fair , and his calm and handsome face had regular , delicate features . 
Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression . 
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip , and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm . 
Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room . 
He evidently tried to find something to say , but failed . 
Boris on the contrary at once found his footing , and related quietly and humorously how he had know that doll Mimi when she was still quite a young lady , before her nose was broken ; how she had aged during the five years he had known her , and how her head had cracked right across the skull . 
Having said this he glanced at Natasha . 
She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother , who was screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter , and unable to control herself any longer , she jumped up and rushed from the room as fast as her nimble little feet would carry her . 
Boris did not laugh . 
`` You were meaning to go out , were n't you , Mamma ? 
Do you want the carriage ? '' 
he asked his mother with a smile . 
`` Yes , yes , go and tell them to get it ready , '' she answered , returning his smile . 
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha . 
The plump boy ran after them angrily , as if vexed that their program had been disturbed . 
The only young people remaining in the drawing room , not counting the young lady visitor and the countess ' eldest daughter -LRB- who was four years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person -RRB- , were Nicholas and Sonya , the niece . 
Sonya was a slender little brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes , thick black plaits coiling twice round her head , and a tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular arms and neck . 
By the grace of her movements , by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs , and by a certain coyness and reserve of manner , she reminded one of a pretty , half-grown kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat . 
She evidently considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling , but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going to join the army , with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone , and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could , like Natasha and Boris , escape from the drawing room . 
`` Ah yes , my dear , '' said the count , addressing the visitor and pointing to Nicholas , `` his friend Boris has become an officer , and so for friendship 's sake he is leaving the university and me , his old father , and entering the military service , my dear . 
And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department ! 
Is n't that friendship ? '' 
remarked the count in an inquiring tone . 
`` But they say that war has been declared , '' replied the visitor . 
`` They 've been saying so a long while , '' said the count , `` and they 'll say so again and again , and that will be the end of it . 
My dear , there 's friendship for you , '' he repeated . 
`` He 's joining the hussars . '' 
The visitor , not knowing what to say , shook her head . 
`` It 's not at all from friendship , '' declared Nicholas , flaring up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion . 
`` It is not from friendship at all ; I simply feel that the army is my vocation . '' 
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor ; and they were both regarding him with a smile of approbation . 
`` Schubert , the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars , is dining with us today . 
He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him . 
It ca n't be helped ! '' 
said the count , shrugging his shoulders and speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him . 
`` I have already told you , Papa , '' said his son , `` that if you do n't wish to let me go , I 'll stay . 
But I know I am no use anywhere except in the army ; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk . 
-- I do n't know how to hide what I feel . '' 
As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor . 
The little kitten , feasting her eyes on him , seemed ready at any moment to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature . 
`` All right , all right ! '' 
said the old count . 
`` He always flares up ! 
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads ; they all think of how he rose from an ensign and became Emperor . 
Well , well , God grant it , '' he added , not noticing his visitor 's sarcastic smile . 
The elders began talking about Bonaparte . 
Julie Karagina turned to young Rostov . 
`` What a pity you were n't at the Arkharovs ' on Thursday . 
It was so dull without you , '' said she , giving him a tender smile . 
The young man , flattered , sat down nearer to her with a coquettish smile , and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart of Sonya , who blushed and smiled unnaturally . 
In the midst of his talk he glanced round at her . 
She gave him a passionately angry glance , and hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on her lips , she got up and left the room . 
All Nicholas ' animation vanished . 
He waited for the first pause in the conversation , and then with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya . 
`` How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves ! '' 
said Anna Mikhaylovna , pointing to Nicholas as he went out . 
`` Cousinage -- dangereux voisinage ; '' * she added . 
* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood . 
`` Yes , '' said the countess when the brightness these young people had brought into the room had vanished ; and as if answering a question no one had put but which was always in her mind , `` and how much suffering , how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in them now ! 
And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy . 
One is always , always anxious ! 
Especially just at this age , so dangerous both for girls and boys . '' 
`` It all depends on the bringing up , '' remarked the visitor . 
`` Yes , you 're quite right , '' continued the countess . 
`` Till now I have always , thank God , been my children 's friend and had their full confidence , '' said she , repeating the mistake of so many parents who imagine that their children have no secrets from them . 
`` I know I shall always be my daughters ' first confidante , and that if Nicholas , with his impulsive nature , does get into mischief -LRB- a boy ca n't help it -RRB- , he will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men . '' 
`` Yes , they are splendid , splendid youngsters , '' chimed in the count , who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that everything was splendid . 
`` Just fancy : wants to be an hussar . 
What 's one to do , my dear ? '' 
`` What a charming creature your younger girl is , '' said the visitor ; `` a little volcano ! '' 
`` Yes , a regular volcano , '' said the count . 
`` Takes after me ! 
And what a voice she has ; though she 's my daughter , I tell the truth when I say she 'll be a singer , a second Salomoni ! 
We have engaged an Italian to give her lessons . '' 
`` Is n't she too young ? 
I have heard that it harms the voice to train it at that age . '' 
