She started , glanced round at him , and screening the candle with her hand stooped carefully with a supple and exact movement , picked up the ball , and regained her former position . 
He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw a deep breath after stooping , but refrained from doing so and breathed cautiously . 
At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past , and he had told her that if he lived he would always thank God for his wound which had brought them together again , but after that they never spoke of the future . 
`` Can it or can it not be ? '' 
he now thought as he looked at her and listened to the light click of the steel needles . 
`` Can fate have brought me to her so strangely only for me to die ? 
... Is it possible that the truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that I have spent my life in falsity ? 
I love her more than anything in the world ! 
But what am I to do if I love her ? '' 
he thought , and he involuntarily groaned , from a habit acquired during his sufferings . 
On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking , leaned nearer to him , and suddenly , noticing his shining eyes , stepped lightly up to him and bent over him . 
`` You are not asleep ? '' 
`` No , I have been looking at you a long time . 
I felt you come in . 
No one else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do ... that light . 
I want to weep for joy . '' 
Natasha drew closer to him . 
Her face shone with rapturous joy . 
`` Natasha , I love you too much ! 
More than anything in the world . '' 
`` And I ! '' 
-- She turned away for an instant . 
`` Why too much ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Why too much ? 
... Well , what do you , what do you feel in your soul , your whole soul -- shall I live ? 
What do you think ? '' 
`` I am sure of it , sure ! '' 
Natasha almost shouted , taking hold of both his hands with a passionate movement . 
He remained silent awhile . 
`` How good it would be ! '' 
and taking her hand he kissed it . 
Natasha felt happy and agitated , but at once remembered that this would not do and that he had to be quiet . 
`` But you have not slept , '' she said , repressing her joy . 
`` Try to sleep ... please ! '' 
He pressed her hand and released it , and she went back to the candle and sat down again in her former position . 
Twice she turned and looked at him , and her eyes met his beaming at her . 
She set herself a task on her stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished . 
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep . 
He did not sleep long and suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration . 
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now always occupied his mind -- about life and death , and chiefly about death . 
He felt himself nearer to it . 
`` Love ? 
What is love ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Love hinders death . 
Love is life . 
All , everything that I understand , I understand only because I love . 
Everything is , everything exists , only because I love . 
Everything is united by it alone . 
Love is God , and to die means that I , a particle of love , shall return to the general and eternal source . '' 
These thoughts seemed to him comforting . 
But they were only thoughts . 
Something was lacking in them , they were not clear , they were too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun . 
And there was the former agitation and obscurity . 
He fell asleep . 
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in , but that he was quite well and unwounded . 
Many various , indifferent , and insignificant people appeared before him . 
He talked to them and discussed something trivial . 
They were preparing to go away somewhere . 
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had more important cares , but he continued to speak , surprising them by empty witticisms . 
Gradually , unnoticed , all these persons began to disappear and a single question , that of the closed door , superseded all else . 
He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it . 
Everything depended on whether he was , or was not , in time to lock it . 
He went , and tried to hurry , but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be in time to lock the door though he painfully strained all his powers . 
He was seized by an agonizing fear . 
And that fear was the fear of death . 
It stood behind the door . 
But just when he was clumsily creeping toward the door , that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing against it and forcing its way in . 
Something not human -- death -- was breaking in through that door , and had to be kept out . 
He seized the door , making a final effort to hold it back -- to lock it was no longer possible -- but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the door , pushed from behind by that terror , opened and closed again . 
Once again it pushed from outside . 
His last superhuman efforts were vain and both halves of the door noiselessly opened . 
It entered , and it was death , and Prince Andrew died . 
But at the instant he died , Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep , and at the very instant he died , having made an effort , he awoke . 
`` Yes , it was death ! 
I died -- and woke up . 
Yes , death is an awakening ! '' 
And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritual vision . 
He felt as if powers till then confined within him had been liberated , and that strange lightness did not again leave him . 
When , waking in a cold perspiration , he moved on the divan , Natasha went up and asked him what was the matter . 
He did not answer and looked at her strangely , not understanding . 
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary 's arrival . 
From that day , as the doctor expressed it , the wasting fever assumed a malignant character , but what the doctor said did not interest Natasha , she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her were more convincing . 
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with his awakening from sleep . 
And compared to the duration of life it did not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleep compared to the duration of a dream . 
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow awakening . 
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way . 
Both Princess Mary and Natasha , who did not leave him , felt this . 
They did not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselves felt that they were not attending on him -LRB- he was no longer there , he had left them -RRB- but on what reminded them most closely of him -- his body . 
Both felt this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not affect them and they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief . 
Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep , nor did they ever talk to one another about him . 
They felt that they could not express in words what they understood . 
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly , deeper and deeper , away from them , and they both knew that this had to be so and that it was right . 
He confessed , and received communion : everyone came to take leave of him . 
When they brought his son to him , he pressed his lips to the boy 's and turned away , not because he felt it hard and sad -LRB- Princess Mary and Natasha understood that -RRB- but simply because he thought it was all that was required of him , but when they told him to bless the boy , he did what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether there was anything else he should do . 
When the last convulsions of the body , which the spirit was leaving , occurred , Princess Mary and Natasha were present . 
`` Is it over ? '' 
said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutes lain motionless , growing cold before them . 
Natasha went up , looked at the dead eyes , and hastened to close them . 
