was heard . 
Most of the time , by their officers ' order , the men sat on the ground . 
One , having taken off his shako , carefully loosened the gathers of its lining and drew them tight again ; another , rubbing some dry clay between his palms , polished his bayonet ; another fingered the strap and pulled the buckle of his bandolier , while another smoothed and refolded his leg bands and put his boots on again . 
Some built little houses of the tufts in the plowed ground , or plaited baskets from the straw in the cornfield . 
All seemed fully absorbed in these pursuits . 
When men were killed or wounded , when rows of stretchers went past , when some troops retreated , and when great masses of the enemy came into view through the smoke , no one paid any attention to these things . 
But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some of our infantry were seen to move forward , words of approval were heard on all sides . 
But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrences quite apart from , and unconnected with , the battle . 
It was as if the minds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday , commonplace occurrences . 
A battery of artillery was passing in front of the regiment . 
The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over a trace . 
`` Hey , look at the trace horse ! 
... Get her leg out ! 
She 'll fall ... . 
Ah , they do n't see it ! '' 
came identical shouts from the ranks all along the regiment . 
Another time , general attention was attracted by a small brown dog , coming heaven knows whence , which trotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tail stiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by , when it yelped , tucked its tail between its legs , and darted aside . 
Yells and shrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment . 
But such distractions lasted only a moment , and for eight hours the men had been inactive , without food , in constant fear of death , and their pale and gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier . 
Prince Andrew , pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment , paced up and down from the border of one patch to another , at the edge of the meadow beside an oatfield , with head bowed and arms behind his back . 
There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given . 
Everything went on of itself . 
The killed were dragged from the front , the wounded carried away , and the ranks closed up . 
If any soldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily . 
At first Prince Andrew , considering it his duty to rouse the courage of the men and to set them an example , walked about among the ranks , but he soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and that there was nothing he could teach them . 
All the powers of his soul , as of every soldier there , were unconsciously bent on avoiding the contemplation of the horrors of their situation . 
He walked along the meadow , dragging his feet , rustling the grass , and gazing at the dust that covered his boots ; now he took big strides trying to keep to the footprints left on the meadow by the mowers , then he counted his steps , calculating how often he must walk from one strip to another to walk a mile , then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood that grew along a boundary rut , rubbed them in his palms , and smelled their pungent , sweetly bitter scent . 
Nothing remained of the previous day 's thoughts . 
He thought of nothing . 
He listened with weary ears to the ever-recurring sounds , distinguishing the whistle of flying projectiles from the booming of the reports , glanced at the tiresomely familiar faces of the men of the first battalion , and waited . 
`` Here it comes ... this one is coming our way again ! '' 
he thought , listening to an approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke . 
`` One , another ! 
Again ! 
It has hit ... '' He stopped and looked at the ranks . 
`` No , it has gone over . 
But this one has hit ! '' 
And again he started trying to reach the boundary strip in sixteen paces . 
A whizz and a thud ! 
Five paces from him , a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared . 
A chill ran down his back . 
Again he glanced at the ranks . 
Probably many had been hit -- a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion . 
`` Adjutant ! '' 
he shouted . 
`` Order them not to crowd together . '' 
The adjutant , having obeyed this instruction , approached Prince Andrew . 
From the other side a battalion commander rode up . 
`` Look out ! '' 
came a frightened cry from a soldier and , like a bird whirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground , a shell dropped with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew and close to the battalion commander 's horse . 
The horse first , regardless of whether it was right or wrong to show fear , snorted , reared almost throwing the major , and galloped aside . 
The horse 's terror infected the men . 
`` Lie down ! '' 
cried the adjutant , throwing himself flat on the ground . 
Prince Andrew hesitated . 
The smoking shell spun like a top between him and the prostrate adjutant , near a wormwood plant between the field and the meadow . 
`` Can this be death ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , looking with a quite new , envious glance at the grass , the wormwood , and the streamlet of smoke that curled up from the rotating black ball . 
`` I can not , I do not wish to die . 
I love life -- I love this grass , this earth , this air ... '' He thought this , and at the same time remembered that people were looking at him . 
`` It 's shameful , sir ! '' 
he said to the adjutant . 
`` What ... '' He did not finish speaking . 
At one and the same moment came the sound of an explosion , a whistle of splinters as from a breaking window frame , a suffocating smell of powder , and Prince Andrew started to one side , raising his arm , and fell on his chest . 
Several officers ran up to him . 
From the right side of his abdomen , blood was welling out making a large stain on the grass . 
The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind the officers . 
Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass , breathing heavily and noisily . 
`` What are you waiting for ? 
Come along ! '' 
The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs , but he moaned piteously and , exchanging looks , they set him down again . 
`` Pick him up , lift him , it 's all the same ! '' 
cried someone . 
They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher . 
`` Ah , God ! 
My God ! 
What is it ? 
The stomach ? 
That means death ! 
My God ! '' 
-- voices among the officers were heard saying . 
`` It flew a hair 's breadth past my ear , '' said the adjutant . 
The peasants , adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders , started hurriedly along the path they had trodden down , to the dressing station . 
`` Keep in step ! 
Ah ... those peasants ! '' 
shouted an officer , seizing by their shoulders and checking the peasants , who were walking unevenly and jolting the stretcher . 
`` Get into step , Fedor ... I say , Fedor ! '' 
said the foremost peasant . 
`` Now that 's right ! '' 
said the one behind joyfully , when he had got into step . 
`` Your excellency ! 
Eh , Prince ! '' 
said the trembling voice of Timokhin , who had run up and was looking down on the stretcher . 
Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker from the stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again his eyelids drooped . 
The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to dressing station by the wood , where wagons were stationed . 
The dressing station consisted of three tents with flaps turned back , pitched at the edge of a birch wood . 
In the wood , wagons and horses were standing . 
The horses were eating oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down and pecked the grains that fell . 
Some crows , scenting blood , flew among the birch trees cawing impatiently . 
Around the tents , over more than five acres , bloodstained men in various garbs stood , sat , or lay . 
