`` You 've been in a hurry . 
That 's bad ! '' 
He laughed in his usual dry , cold , unpleasant way , with his lips only and not with his eyes . 
`` You must walk , walk as much as possible , as much as possible , '' he said . 
The little princess did not , or did not wish to , hear his words . 
She was silent and seemed confused . 
The prince asked her about her father , and she began to smile and talk . 
He asked about mutual acquaintances , and she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings from various people and retailing the town gossip . 
`` Countess Apraksina , poor thing , has lost her husband and she has cried her eyes out , '' she said , growing more and more lively . 
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly , and suddenly , as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a definite idea of her , he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich . 
`` Well , Michael Ivanovich , our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it . 
Prince Andrew '' -LRB- he always spoke thus of his son -RRB- `` has been telling me what forces are being collected against him ! 
While you and I never thought much of him . '' 
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when `` you and I '' had said such things about Bonaparte , but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on which to hang the prince 's favorite topic , he looked inquiringly at the young prince , wondering what would follow . 
`` He is a great tactician ! '' 
said the prince to his son , pointing to the architect . 
And the conversation again turned on the war , on Bonaparte , and the generals and statesmen of the day . 
The old prince seemed convinced not only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A B C of war or of politics , and that Bonaparte was an insignificant little Frenchy , successful only because there were no longer any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him ; but he was also convinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war , but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing , pretending to do something real . 
Prince Andrew gaily bore with his father 's ridicule of the new men , and drew him on and listened to him with evident pleasure . 
`` The past always seems good , '' said he , `` but did not Suvorov himself fall into a trap Moreau set him , and from which he did not know how to escape ? '' 
`` Who told you that ? 
Who ? '' 
cried the prince . 
`` Suvorov ! '' 
And he jerked away his plate , which Tikhon briskly caught . 
`` Suvorov ! 
... Consider , Prince Andrew . 
Two ... Frederick and Suvorov ; Moreau ! 
... Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand ; but he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands . 
It would have puzzled the devil himself ! 
When you get there you 'll find out what those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are ! 
Suvorov could n't manage them so what chance has Michael Kutuzov ? 
No , my dear boy , '' he continued , `` you and your generals wo n't get on against Buonaparte ; you 'll have to call in the French , so that birds of a feather may fight together . 
The German , Pahlen , has been sent to New York in America , to fetch the Frenchman , Moreau , '' he said , alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service ... `` Wonderful ! 
... Were the Potemkins , Suvorovs , and Orlovs Germans ? 
No , lad , either you fellows have all lost your wits , or I have outlived mine . 
May God help you , but we 'll see what will happen . 
Buonaparte has become a great commander among them ! 
Hm ! 
... '' `` I do n't at all say that all the plans are good , '' said Prince Andrew , `` I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte . 
You may laugh as much as you like , but all the same Bonaparte is a great general ! '' 
`` Michael Ivanovich ! '' 
cried the old prince to the architect who , busy with his roast meat , hoped he had been forgotten : `` Did n't I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician ? 
Here , he says the same thing . '' 
`` To be sure , your excellency . '' 
replied the architect . 
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh . 
`` Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth . 
He has got splendid soldiers . 
Besides he began by attacking Germans . 
And only idlers have failed to beat the Germans . 
Since the world began everybody has beaten the Germans . 
They beat no one -- except one another . 
He made his reputation fighting them . '' 
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which , according to him , Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics . 
His son made no rejoinder , but it was evident that whatever arguments were presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion . 
He listened , refraining from a reply , and involuntarily wondered how this old man , living alone in the country for so many years , could know and discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and political events . 
`` You think I 'm an old man and do n't understand the present state of affairs ? '' 
concluded his father . 
`` But it troubles me . 
I do n't sleep at night . 
Come now , where has this great commander of yours shown his skill ? '' 
he concluded . 
`` That would take too long to tell , '' answered the son . 
`` Well , then go to your Buonaparte ! 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , here 's another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours , '' he exclaimed in excellent French . 
`` You know , Prince , I am not a Bonapartist ! '' 
`` Dieu sait quand reviendra ... '' hummed the prince out of tune and , with a laugh still more so , he quitted the table . 
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the dinner sat silent , glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in-law and now at Princess Mary . 
When they left the table she took her sister-in-law 's arm and drew her into another room . 
`` What a clever man your father is , '' said she ; `` perhaps that is why I am afraid of him . '' 
`` Oh , he is so kind ! '' 
answered Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening . 
The old prince , not altering his routine , retired as usual after dinner . 
The little princess was in her sister-in-law 's room . 
Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him . 
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in , he ordered the horses to be harnessed . 
Only those things he always kept with him remained in his room ; a small box , a large canteen fitted with silver plate , two Turkish pistols and a saber -- a present from his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov . 
All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew 's were in very good order : new , clean , and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes . 
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life , men capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind . 
At such moments one reviews the past and plans for the future . 
Prince Andrew 's face looked very thoughtful and tender . 
With his hands behind him he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room , looking straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head . 
Did he fear going to the war , or was he sad at leaving his wife ? 
-- perhaps both , but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood , for hearing footsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands , stopped at a table as if tying the cover of the small box , and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable expression . 
It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard . 
`` I hear you have given orders to harness , '' she cried , panting -LRB- she had apparently been running -RRB- , `` and I did so wish to have another talk with you alone ! 
God knows how long we may again be parted . 
You are not angry with me for coming ? 
You have changed so , Andrusha , '' she added , as if to explain such a question . 
She smiled as she uttered his pet name , `` Andrusha . '' 
It was obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha -- the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood . 
`` And where is Lise ? '' 
he asked , answering her question only by a smile . 
`` She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room . 
Oh , Andrew ! 
What a treasure of a wife you have , '' said she , sitting down on the sofa , facing her brother . 
`` She is quite a child : such a dear , merry child . 
I have grown so fond of her . '' 
