It 's what the old folk used to say : ' A sweating hand 's an open hand , a dry hand 's close . ' 
He 's naked , but yet he 's given it back . '' 
Karataev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at the pieces . 
`` But they 'll make grand leg bands , dear friend , '' he said , and went back into the shed . 
Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner and though the French had offered to move him from the men 's to the officers ' shed , he had stayed in the shed where he was first put . 
In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost the extreme limits of privation a man can endure ; but thanks to his physical strength and health , of which he had till then been unconscious , and thanks especially to the fact that the privations came so gradually that it was impossible to say when they began , he endured his position not only lightly but joyfully . 
And just at this time he obtained the tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerly striven in vain to reach . 
He had long sought in different ways that tranquillity of mind , that inner harmony which had so impressed him in the soldiers at the battle of Borodino . 
He had sought it in philanthropy , in Freemasonry , in the dissipations of town life , in wine , in heroic feats of self-sacrifice , and in romantic love for Natasha ; he had sought it by reasoning -- and all these quests and experiments had failed him . 
And now without thinking about it he had found that peace and inner harmony only through the horror of death , through privation , and through what he recognized in Karataev . 
Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had as it were forever washed away from his imagination and memory the agitating thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important . 
It did not now occur to him to think of Russia , or the war , or politics , or Napoleon . 
It was plain to him that all these things were no business of his , and that he was not called on to judge concerning them and therefore could not do so . 
`` Russia and summer weather are not bound together , '' he thought , repeating words of Karataev 's which he found strangely consoling . 
His intention of killing Napoleon and his calculations of the cabalistic number of the beast of the Apocalypse now seemed to him meaningless and even ridiculous . 
His anger with his wife and anxiety that his name should not be smirched now seemed not merely trivial but even amusing . 
What concern was it of his that somewhere or other that woman was leading the life she preferred ? 
What did it matter to anybody , and especially to him , whether or not they found out that their prisoner 's name was Count Bezukhov ? 
He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew and quite agreed with him , though he understood Prince Andrew 's thoughts somewhat differently . 
Prince Andrew had thought and said that happiness could only be negative , but had said it with a shade of bitterness and irony as though he was really saying that all desire for positive happiness is implanted in us merely to torment us and never be satisfied . 
But Pierre believed it without any mental reservation . 
The absence of suffering , the satisfaction of one 's needs and consequent freedom in the choice of one 's occupation , that is , of one 's way of life , now seemed to Pierre to be indubitably man 's highest happiness . 
Here and now for the first time he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat , drinking when he wanted to drink , sleeping when he wanted to sleep , of warmth when he was cold , of talking to a fellow man when he wished to talk and to hear a human voice . 
The satisfaction of one 's needs -- good food , cleanliness , and freedom -- now that he was deprived of all this , seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness ; and the choice of occupation , that is , of his way of life -- now that that was so restricted -- seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that a superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one 's needs , while great freedom in the choice of occupation -- such freedom as his wealth , his education , and his social position had given him in his own life -- is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having an occupation . 
All Pierre 's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free . 
Yet subsequently , and for the rest of his life , he thought and spoke with enthusiasm of that month of captivity , of those irrecoverable , strong , joyful sensations , and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner freedom which he experienced only during those weeks . 
When on the first day he got up early , went out of the shed at dawn , and saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark at first , the hoarfrost on the dusty grass , the Sparrow Hills , and the wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance , when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the crows flying from Moscow across the field , and when afterwards light gleamed from the east and the sun 's rim appeared solemnly from behind a cloud , and the cupolas and crosses , the hoarfrost , the distance and the river , all began to sparkle in the glad light -- Pierre felt a new joy and strength in life such as he had never before known . 
And this not only stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment , but even grew in strength as the hardships of his position increased . 
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed . 
With his knowledge of languages , the respect shown him by the French , his simplicity , his readiness to give anything asked of him -LRB- he received the allowance of three rubles a week made to officers -RRB- ; with his strength , which he showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut ; his gentleness to his companions , and his capacity for sitting still and thinking without doing anything -LRB- which seemed to them incomprehensible -RRB- , he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being . 
The very qualities that had been a hindrance , if not actually harmful , to him in the world he had lived in -- his strength , his disdain for the comforts of life , his absent-mindedness and simplicity -- here among these people gave him almost the status of a hero . 
And Pierre felt that their opinion placed responsibilities upon him . 
The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth and seventh of October : kitchens and sheds were dismantled , carts loaded , and troops and baggage trains started . 
At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim , wearing shakos and carrying muskets , knapsacks , and enormous sacks , stood in front of the sheds , and animated French talk mingled with curses sounded all along the lines . 
In the shed everyone was ready , dressed , belted , shod , and only awaited the order to start . 
The sick soldier , Sokolov , pale and thin with dark shadows round his eyes , alone sat in his place barefoot and not dressed . 
His eyes , prominent from the emaciation of his face , gazed inquiringly at his comrades who were paying no attention to him , and he moaned regularly and quietly . 
It was evidently not so much his sufferings that caused him to moan -LRB- he had dysentery -RRB- as his fear and grief at being left alone . 
Pierre , girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoes Karataev had made for him from some leather a French soldier had torn off a tea chest and brought to have his boots mended with , went up to the sick man and squatted down beside him . 
`` You know , Sokolov , they are not all going away ! 
They have a hospital here . 
You may be better off than we others , '' said Pierre . 
`` O Lord ! 
Oh , it will be the death of me ! 
O Lord ! '' 
moaned the man in a louder voice . 
`` I 'll go and ask them again directly , '' said Pierre , rising and going to the door of the shed . 
Just as Pierre reached the door , the corporal who had offered him a pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers . 
The corporal and soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that had metal straps , and these changed their familiar faces . 
The corporal came , according to orders , to shut the door . 
The prisoners had to be counted before being let out . 
`` Corporal , what will they do with the sick man ? 
... '' Pierre began . 
But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporal he knew or a stranger , so unlike himself did the corporal seem at that moment . 
Moreover , just as Pierre was speaking a sharp rattle of drums was suddenly heard from both sides . 
The corporal frowned at Pierre 's words and , uttering some meaningless oaths , slammed the door . 
The shed became semidark , and the sharp rattle of the drums on two sides drowned the sick man 's groans . 
`` There it is ! 
... It again ! 
... '' said Pierre to himself , and an involuntary shudder ran down his spine . 
In the corporal 's changed face , in the sound of his voice , in the stirring and deafening noise of the drums , he recognized that mysterious , callous force which compelled people against their will to kill their fellow men -- that force the effect of which he had witnessed during the executions . 
To fear or to try to escape that force , to address entreaties or exhortations to those who served as its tools , was useless . 
Pierre knew this now . 
One had to wait and endure . 
He did not again go to the sick man , nor turn to look at him , but stood frowning by the door of the hut . 
When that door was opened and the prisoners , crowding against one another like a flock of sheep , squeezed into the exit , Pierre pushed his way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporal had assured him was ready to do anything for him . 
The captain was also in marching kit , and on his cold face appeared that same it which Pierre had recognized in the corporal 's words and in the roll of the drums . 
`` Pass on , pass on ! '' 
the captain reiterated , frowning sternly , and looking at the prisoners who thronged past him . 
Pierre went up to him , though he knew his attempt would be vain . 
`` What now ? '' 
the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizing Pierre . 
Pierre told him about the sick man . 
`` He 'll manage to walk , devil take him ! '' 
said the captain . 
`` Pass on , pass on ! '' 
he continued without looking at Pierre . 
`` But he is dying , '' Pierre again began . 
`` Be so good ... '' shouted the captain , frowning angrily . 
`` Dram-da-da-dam , dam-dam ... '' rattled the drums , and Pierre understood that this mysterious force completely controlled these men and that it was now useless to say any more . 
The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told to march in front . 
There were about thirty officers , with Pierre among them , and about three hundred men . 
The officers , who had come from the other sheds , were all strangers to Pierre and much better dressed than he . 
They looked at him and at his shoes mistrustfully , as at an alien . 
Not far from him walked a fat major with a sallow , bloated , angry face , who was wearing a Kazan dressing grown tied round with a towel , and who evidently enjoyed the respect of his fellow prisoners . 
He kept one hand , in which he clasped his tobacco pouch , inside the bosom of his dressing gown and held the stem of his pipe firmly with the other . 
Panting and puffing , the major grumbled and growled at everybody because he thought he was being pushed and that they were all hurrying when they had nowhere to hurry to and were all surprised at something when there was nothing to be surprised at . 
Another , a thin little officer , was speaking to everyone , conjecturing where they were now being taken and how far they would get that day . 
An official in felt boots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from side to side and gazed at the ruins of Moscow , loudly announcing his observations as to what had been burned down and what this or that part of the city was that they could see . 
A third officer , who by his accent was a Pole , disputed with the commissariat officer , arguing that he was mistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow . 
`` What are you disputing about ? '' 
said the major angrily . 
`` What does it matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius ? 
You see it 's burned down , and there 's an end of it ... . 
What are you pushing for ? 
Is n't the road wide enough ? '' 
said he , turning to a man behind him who was not pushing him at all . 
`` Oh , oh , oh ! 
What have they done ? '' 
the prisoners on one side and another were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins . 
