her look seemed to say . 
She saw her husband , but did not realize the significance of his appearance before her now . 
Prince Andrew went round the sofa and kissed her forehead . 
`` My darling ! '' 
he said -- a word he had never used to her before . 
`` God is merciful ... '' She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach . 
`` I expected help from you and I get none , none from you either ! '' 
said her eyes . 
She was not surprised at his having come ; she did not realize that he had come . 
His coming had nothing to do with her sufferings or with their relief . 
The pangs began again and Mary Bogdanovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room . 
The doctor entered . 
Prince Andrew went out and , meeting Princess Mary , again joined her . 
They began talking in whispers , but their talk broke off at every moment . 
They waited and listened . 
`` Go , dear , '' said Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the room next to hers . 
A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face and became confused when she saw Prince Andrew . 
He covered his face with his hands and remained so for some minutes . 
Piteous , helpless , animal moans came through the door . 
Prince Andrew got up , went to the door , and tried to open it . 
Someone was holding it shut . 
`` You ca n't come in ! 
You ca n't ! '' 
said a terrified voice from within . 
He began pacing the room . 
The screaming ceased , and a few more seconds went by . 
Then suddenly a terrible shriek -- it could not be hers , she could not scream like that -- came from the bedroom . 
Prince Andrew ran to the door ; the scream ceased and he heard the wail of an infant . 
`` What have they taken a baby in there for ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew in the first second . 
`` A baby ? 
What baby ... ? 
Why is there a baby there ? 
Or is the baby born ? '' 
Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail ; tears choked him , and leaning his elbows on the window sill be began to cry , sobbing like a child . 
The door opened . 
The doctor with his shirt sleeves tucked up , without a coat , pale and with a trembling jaw , came out of the room . 
Prince Andrew turned to him , but the doctor gave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word . 
A woman rushed out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped , hesitating on the threshold . 
He went into his wife 's room . 
She was lying dead , in the same position he had seen her in five minutes before and , despite the fixed eyes and the pallor of the cheeks , the same expression was on her charming childlike face with its upper lip covered with tiny black hair . 
`` I love you all , and have done no harm to anyone ; and what have you done to me ? '' 
-- said her charming , pathetic , dead face . 
In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt and squealed in Mary Bogdanovna 's trembling white hands . 
Two hours later Prince Andrew , stepping softly , went into his father 's room . 
The old man already knew everything . 
He was standing close to the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closed like a vise round his son 's neck , and without a word he began to sob like a child . 
Three days later the little princess was buried , and Prince Andrew went up the steps to where the coffin stood , to give her the farewell kiss . 
And there in the coffin was the same face , though with closed eyes . 
`` Ah , what have you done to me ? '' 
it still seemed to say , and Prince Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul and that he was guilty of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget . 
He could not weep . 
The old man too came up and kissed the waxen little hands that lay quietly crossed one on the other on her breast , and to him , too , her face seemed to say : `` Ah , what have you done to me , and why ? '' 
And at the sight the old man turned angrily away . 
Another five days passed , and then the young Prince Nicholas Andreevich was baptized . 
The wet nurse supported the coverlet with her while the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy 's little red and wrinkled soles and palms . 
His grandfather , who was his godfather , trembling and afraid of dropping him , carried the infant round the battered tin font and handed him over to the godmother , Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew sat in another room , faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned in the font , and awaited the termination of the ceremony . 
He looked up joyfully at the baby when the nurse brought it to him and nodded approval when she told him that the wax with the baby 's hair had not sunk in the font but had floated . 
Rostov 's share in Dolokhov 's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by the efforts of the old count , and instead of being degraded to the ranks as he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general of Moscow . 
As a result he could not go to the country with the rest of the family , but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties . 
Dolokhov recovered , and Rostov became very friendly with him during his convalescence . 
Dolokhov lay ill at his mother 's who loved him passionately and tenderly , and old Mary Ivanovna , who had grown fond of Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya , often talked to him about her son . 
`` Yes , Count , '' she would say , `` he is too noble and pure-souled for our present , depraved world . 
No one now loves virtue ; it seems like a reproach to everyone . 
Now tell me , Count , was it right , was it honorable , of Bezukhov ? 
And Fedya , with his noble spirit , loved him and even now never says a word against him . 
Those pranks in Petersburg when they played some tricks on a policeman , did n't they do it together ? 
And there ! 
Bezukhov got off scotfree , while Fedya had to bear the whole burden on his shoulders . 
Fancy what he had to go through ! 
It 's true he has been reinstated , but how could they fail to do that ? 
I think there were not many such gallant sons of the fatherland out there as he . 
And now -- this duel ! 
Have these people no feeling , or honor ? 
Knowing him to be an only son , to challenge him and shoot so straight ! 
It 's well God had mercy on us . 
And what was it for ? 
Who does n't have intrigues nowadays ? 
Why , if he was so jealous , as I see things he should have shown it sooner , but he lets it go on for months . 
And then to call him out , reckoning on Fedya not fighting because he owed him money ! 
What baseness ! 
What meanness ! 
I know you understand Fedya , my dear count ; that , believe me , is why I am so fond of you . 
Few people do understand him . 
He is such a lofty , heavenly soul ! '' 
Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a way no one would have expected of him . 
`` I know people consider me a bad man ! '' 
he said . 
`` Let them ! 
I do n't care a straw about anyone but those I love ; but those I love , I love so that I would give my life for them , and the others I 'd throttle if they stood in my way . 
I have an adored , a priceless mother , and two or three friends -- you among them -- and as for the rest I only care about them in so far as they are harmful or useful . 
And most of them are harmful , especially the women . 
Yes , dear boy , '' he continued , `` I have met loving , noble , high-minded men , but I have not yet met any women -- countesses or cooks -- who were not venal . 
I have not yet met that divine purity and devotion I look for in women . 
If I found such a one I 'd give my life for her ! 
But those ! 
... '' and he made a gesture of contempt . 
`` And believe me , if I still value my life it is only because I still hope to meet such a divine creature , who will regenerate , purify , and elevate me . 
