I know I ca n't prevent your doing so , but if you have a spark of conscience ... '' Pierre paced the room several times in silence . 
Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips . 
`` After all , you must understand that besides your pleasure there is such a thing as other people 's happiness and peace , and that you are ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself ! 
Amuse yourself with women like my wife -- with them you are within your rights , for they know what you want of them . 
They are armed against you by the same experience of debauchery ; but to promise a maid to marry her ... to deceive , to kidnap ... . 
Do n't you understand that it is as mean as beating an old man or a child ? 
... '' Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with a questioning look . 
`` I do n't know about that , eh ? '' 
said Anatole , growing more confident as Pierre mastered his wrath . 
`` I do n't know that and do n't want to , '' he said , not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor of his lower jaw , `` but you have used such words to me -- ` mean ' and so on -- which as a man of honor I ca n't allow anyone to use . '' 
Pierre glanced at him with amazement , unable to understand what he wanted . 
`` Though it was tete-a-tete , '' Anatole continued , `` still I ca n't ... '' `` Is it satisfaction you want ? '' 
said Pierre ironically . 
`` You could at least take back your words . 
What ? 
If you want me to do as you wish , eh ? '' 
`` I take them back , I take them back ! '' 
said Pierre , `` and I ask you to forgive me . '' 
Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button . 
`` And if you require money for your journey ... '' Anatole smiled . 
The expression of that base and cringing smile , which Pierre knew so well in his wife , revolted him . 
`` Oh , vile and heartless brood ! '' 
he exclaimed , and left the room . 
Next day Anatole left for Petersburg . 
Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna 's to tell her of the fulfillment of her wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow . 
The whole house was in a state of alarm and commotion . 
Natasha was very ill , having , as Marya Dmitrievna told him in secret , poisoned herself the night after she had been told that Anatole was married , with some arsenic she had stealthily procured . 
After swallowing a little she had been so frightened that she woke Sonya and told her what she had done . 
The necessary antidotes had been administered in time and she was now out of danger , though still so weak that it was out of the question to move her to the country , and so the countess had been sent for . 
Pierre saw the distracted count , and Sonya , who had a tear-stained face , but he could not see Natasha . 
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossip about the attempted abduction of Rostova . 
He resolutely denied these rumors , assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that his brother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused . 
It seemed to Pierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and re-establish Natasha 's reputation . 
He was awaiting Prince Andrew 's return with dread and went every day to the old prince 's for news of him . 
Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town from Mademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in which Natasha had broken off her engagement . 
He seemed in better spirits than usual and awaited his son with great impatience . 
Some days after Anatole 's departure Pierre received a note from Prince Andrew , informing him of his arrival and asking him to come to see him . 
As soon as he reached Moscow , Prince Andrew had received from his father Natasha 's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagement -LRB- Mademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary and given it to the old prince -RRB- , and he heard from him the story of Natasha 's elopement , with additions . 
Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to see him next morning . 
Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almost the same state as Natasha and was therefore surprised on entering the drawing room to hear him in the study talking in a loud animated voice about some intrigue going on in Petersburg . 
The old prince 's voice and another now and then interrupted him . 
Princess Mary came out to meet Pierre . 
She sighed , looking toward the door of the room where Prince Andrew was , evidently intending to express her sympathy with his sorrow , but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad both at what had happened and at the way her brother had taken the news of Natasha 's faithlessness . 
`` He says he expected it , '' she remarked . 
`` I know his pride will not let him express his feelings , but still he has taken it better , far better , than I expected . 
Evidently it had to be ... '' `` But is it possible that all is really ended ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment . 
She did not understand how he could ask such a question . 
Pierre went into the study . 
Prince Andrew , greatly changed and plainly in better health , but with a fresh horizontal wrinkle between his brows , stood in civilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshcherski , warmly disputing and vigorously gesticulating . 
The conversation was about Speranski -- the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery had just reached Moscow . 
`` Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic about him a month ago , '' Prince Andrew was saying , `` and by those who were unable to understand his aims . 
To judge a man who is in disfavor and to throw on him all the blame of other men 's mistakes is very easy , but I maintain that if anything good has been accomplished in this reign it was done by him , by him alone . '' 
He paused at the sight of Pierre . 
His face quivered and immediately assumed a vindictive expression . 
`` Posterity will do him justice , '' he concluded , and at once turned to Pierre . 
`` Well , how are you ? 
Still getting stouter ? '' 
he said with animation , but the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened . 
`` Yes , I am well , '' he said in answer to Pierre 's question , and smiled . 
To Pierre that smile said plainly : `` I am well , but my health is now of no use to anyone . '' 
After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polish frontier , about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre , and about M. Dessalles , whom he had brought from abroad to be his son 's tutor , Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversation about Speranski which was still going on between the two old men . 
`` If there were treason , or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon , they would have been made public , '' he said with warmth and haste . 
`` I do not , and never did , like Speranski personally , but I like justice ! '' 
Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was only too familiar , to get excited and to have arguments about extraneous matters in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and too intimate . 
When Prince Meshcherski had left , Prince Andrew took Pierre 's arm and asked him into the room that had been assigned him . 
A bed had been made up there , and some open portmanteaus and trunks stood about . 
Prince Andrew went to one and took out a small casket , from which he drew a packet wrapped in paper . 
He did it all silently and very quickly . 
He stood up and coughed . 
His face was gloomy and his lips compressed . 
`` Forgive me for troubling you ... '' Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha , and his broad face expressed pity and sympathy . 
This expression irritated Prince Andrew , and in a determined , ringing , and unpleasant tone he continued : `` I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heard reports of your brother-in-law having sought her hand , or something of that kind . 
Is that true ? '' 
`` Both true and untrue , '' Pierre began ; but Prince Andrew interrupted him . 
`` Here are her letters and her portrait , '' said he . 
He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre . 
`` Give this to the countess ... if you see her . '' 
`` She is very ill , '' said Pierre . 
`` Then she is here still ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` And Prince Kuragin ? '' 
he added quickly . 
`` He left long ago . 
She has been at death 's door . '' 
`` I much regret her illness , '' said Prince Andrew ; and he smiled like his father , coldly , maliciously , and unpleasantly . 
`` So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with his hand ? '' 
said Prince Andrew , and he snorted several times . 
`` He could not marry , for he was married already , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably , again reminding one of his father . 
`` And where is your brother-in-law now , if I may ask ? '' 
he said . 
`` He has gone to Peters ... But I do n't know , '' said Pierre . 
`` Well , it does n't matter , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Tell Countess Rostova that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her all that is good . '' 
Pierre took the packet . 
Prince Andrew , as if trying to remember whether he had something more to say , or waiting to see if Pierre would say anything , looked fixedly at him . 
`` I say , do you remember our discussion in Petersburg ? '' 
asked Pierre , `` about ... '' `` Yes , '' returned Prince Andrew hastily . 
