he asked , on seeing the prisoners . 
They named the colonel , Prince Repnin . 
`` You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander 's regiment of Horse Guards ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` I commanded a squadron , '' replied Repnin . 
`` Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably , '' said Napoleon . 
`` The praise of a great commander is a soldier 's highest reward , '' said Repnin . 
`` I bestow it with pleasure , '' said Napoleon . 
`` And who is that young man beside you ? '' 
Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen . 
After looking at him Napoleon smiled . 
`` He 's very young to come to meddle with us . '' 
`` Youth is no hindrance to courage , '' muttered Sukhtelen in a failing voice . 
`` A splendid reply ! '' 
said Napoleon . 
`` Young man , you will go far ! '' 
Prince Andrew , who had also been brought forward before the Emperor 's eyes to complete the show of prisoners , could not fail to attract his attention . 
Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him on the battlefield and , addressing him , again used the epithet `` young man '' that was connected in his memory with Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , and you , young man , '' said he . 
`` How do you feel , mon brave ? '' 
Though five minutes before , Prince Andrew had been able to say a few words to the soldiers who were carrying him , now with his eyes fixed straight on Napoleon , he was silent ... . 
So insignificant at that moment seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon , so mean did his hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victory appear , compared to the lofty , equitable , and kindly sky which he had seen and understood , that he could not answer him . 
Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with the stern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood , suffering , and the nearness of death aroused in him . 
Looking into Napoleon 's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance of greatness , the unimportance of life which no one could understand , and the still greater unimportance of death , the meaning of which no one alive could understand or explain . 
The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said to one of the officers as he went : `` Have these gentlemen attended to and taken to my bivouac ; let my doctor , Larrey , examine their wounds . 
Au revoir , Prince Repnin ! '' 
and he spurred his horse and galloped away . 
His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure . 
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken the little gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother 's neck , but seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners , they now hastened to return the holy image . 
Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced , but the little icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon his chest outside his uniform . 
`` It would be good , '' thought Prince Andrew , glancing at the icon his sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence , `` it would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seems to Mary . 
How good it would be to know where to seek for help in this life , and what to expect after it beyond the grave ! 
How happy and calm I should be if I could now say : ` Lord , have mercy on me ! ' 
... But to whom should I say that ? 
Either to a Power indefinable , incomprehensible , which I not only can not address but which I can not even express in words -- the Great All or Nothing - '' said he to himself , `` or to that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary ! 
There is nothing certain , nothing at all except the unimportance of everything I understand , and the greatness of something incomprehensible but all-important . '' 
The stretchers moved on . 
At every jolt he again felt unendurable pain ; his feverishness increased and he grew delirious . 
Visions of his father , wife , sister , and future son , and the tenderness he had felt the night before the battle , the figure of the insignificant little Napoleon , and above all this the lofty sky , formed the chief subjects of his delirious fancies . 
The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presented itself to him . 
He was already enjoying that happiness when that little Napoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look of shortsighted delight at the misery of others , and doubts and torments had followed , and only the heavens promised peace . 
Toward morning all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darkness of unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon 's doctor , Larrey , was much more likely to end in death than in convalescence . 
`` He is a nervous , bilious subject , '' said Larrey , `` and will not recover . '' 
And Prince Andrew , with others fatally wounded , was left to the care of the inhabitants of the district . 
Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave . 
Denisov was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him to travel with him as far as Moscow and to stay with him there . 
Meeting a comrade at the last post station but one before Moscow , Denisov had drunk three bottles of wine with him and , despite the jolting ruts across the snow-covered road , did not once wake up on the way to Moscow , but lay at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostov , who grew more and more impatient the nearer they got to Moscow . 
`` How much longer ? 
How much longer ? 
Oh , these insufferable streets , shops , bakers ' signboards , street lamps , and sleighs ! '' 
thought Rostov , when their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they had entered Moscow . 
`` Denisov ! 
We 're here ! 
He 's asleep , '' he added , leaning forward with his whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speed of the sleigh . 
Denisov gave no answer . 
`` There 's the corner at the crossroads , where the cabman , Zakhar , has his stand , and there 's Zakhar himself and still the same horse ! 
And here 's the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread ! 
Ca n't you hurry up ? 
Now then ! '' 
`` Which house is it ? '' 
asked the driver . 
`` Why , that one , right at the end , the big one . 
Do n't you see ? 
That 's our house , '' said Rostov . 
`` Of course , it 's our house ! 
Denisov , Denisov ! 
We 're almost there ! '' 
Denisov raised his head , coughed , and made no answer . 
`` Dmitri , '' said Rostov to his valet on the box , `` those lights are in our house , are n't they ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , and there 's a light in your father 's study . '' 
`` Then they 've not gone to bed yet ? 
What do you think ? 
Mind now , do n't forget to put out my new coat , '' added Rostov , fingering his new mustache . 
`` Now then , get on , '' he shouted to the driver . 
`` Do wake up , Vaska ! '' 
he went on , turning to Denisov , whose head was again nodding . 
`` Come , get on ! 
You shall have three rubles for vodka -- get on ! '' 
Rostov shouted , when the sleigh was only three houses from his door . 
It seemed to him the horses were not moving at all . 
At last the sleigh bore to the right , drew up at an entrance , and Rostov saw overhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster broken off , the porch , and the post by the side of the pavement . 
He sprang out before the sleigh stopped , and ran into the hall . 
The house stood cold and silent , as if quite regardless of who had come to it . 
There was no one in the hall . 
`` Oh God ! 
Is everyone all right ? '' 
he thought , stopping for a moment with a sinking heart , and then immediately starting to run along the hall and up the warped steps of the familiar staircase . 
The well-known old door handle , which always angered the countess when it was not properly cleaned , turned as loosely as ever . 
A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom . 
Old Michael was asleep on the chest . 
Prokofy , the footman , who was so strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind , sat plaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges . 
He looked up at the opening door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenly changed to one of delighted amazement . 
`` Gracious heavens ! 
The young count ! '' 
he cried , recognizing his young master . 
`` Can it be ? 
My treasure ! '' 
and Prokofy , trembling with excitement , rushed toward the drawing-room door , probably in order to announce him , but , changing his mind , came back and stooped to kiss the young man 's shoulder . 
`` All well ? '' 
asked Rostov , drawing away his arm . 
