But , fortunately for her , she felt her eyes growing misty , she saw nothing clearly , her pulse beat a hundred to the minute , and the blood throbbed at her heart . 
She could not assume that pose , which would have made her ridiculous , and she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying with all her might to conceal it . 
And this was the very attitude that became her best . 
Before and behind them other visitors were entering , also talking in low tones and wearing ball dresses . 
The mirrors on the landing reflected ladies in white , pale-blue , and pink dresses , with diamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms . 
Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish her reflection from the others . 
All was blended into one brilliant procession . 
On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices , footsteps , and greetings deafened Natasha , and the light and glitter dazzled her still more . 
The host and hostess , who had already been standing at the door for half an hour repeating the same words to the various arrivals , `` Charme de vous voir , '' * greeted the Rostovs and Peronskaya in the same manner . 
* `` Delighted to see you . '' 
The two girls in their white dresses , each with a rose in her black hair , both curtsied in the same way , but the hostess ' eye involuntarily rested longer on the slim Natasha . 
She looked at her and gave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile as hostess . 
Looking at her she may have recalled the golden , irrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball . 
The host also followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which was his daughter . 
`` Charming ! '' 
said he , kissing the tips of his fingers . 
In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaiting the Emperor . 
The countess took up a position in one of the front rows of that crowd . 
Natasha heard and felt that several people were asking about her and looking at her . 
She realized that those noticing her liked her , and this observation helped to calm her . 
`` There are some like ourselves and some worse , '' she thought . 
Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most important people at the ball . 
`` That is the Dutch ambassador , do you see ? 
That gray-haired man , '' she said , indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-gray curly hair , who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something he said . 
`` Ah , here she is , the Queen of Petersburg , Countess Bezukhova , '' said Peronskaya , indicating Helene who had just entered . 
`` How lovely ! 
She is quite equal to Marya Antonovna . 
See how the men , young and old , pay court to her . 
Beautiful and clever ... they say Prince -- is quite mad about her . 
But see , those two , though not good-looking , are even more run after . '' 
She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a very plain daughter . 
`` She is a splendid match , a millionairess , '' said Peronskaya . 
`` And look , here come her suitors . '' 
`` That is Bezukhova 's brother , Anatole Kuragin , '' she said , indicating a handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with head erect , looking at something over the heads of the ladies . 
`` He 's handsome , is n't he ? 
I hear they will marry him to that rich girl . 
But your cousin , Drubetskoy , is also very attentive to her . 
They say she has millions . 
Oh yes , that 's the French ambassador himself ! '' 
she replied to the countess ' inquiry about Caulaincourt . 
`` Looks as if he were a king ! 
All the same , the French are charming , very charming . 
No one more charming in society . 
Ah , here she is ! 
Yes , she is still the most beautiful of them all , our Marya Antonovna ! 
And how simply she is dressed ! 
Lovely ! 
And that stout one in spectacles is the universal Freemason , '' she went on , indicating Pierre . 
`` Put him beside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon ! '' 
Pierre , swaying his stout body , advanced , making way through the crowd and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he were passing through a crowd at a fair . 
He pushed through , evidently looking for someone . 
Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre , `` the buffoon , '' as Peronskaya had called him , and knew he was looking for them , and for her in particular . 
He had promised to be at the ball and introduce partners to her . 
But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome , dark man of middle height , and in a white uniform , who stood by a window talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon . 
Natasha at once recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform : it was Bolkonski , who seemed to her to have grown much younger , happier , and better-looking . 
`` There 's someone else we know -- Bolkonski , do you see , Mamma ? '' 
said Natasha , pointing out Prince Andrew . 
`` You remember , he stayed a night with us at Otradnoe . '' 
`` Oh , you know him ? '' 
said Peronskaya . 
`` I ca n't bear him . 
Il fait a present la pluie et le beau temps . 
* He 's too proud for anything . 
Takes after his father . 
And he 's hand in glove with Speranski , writing some project or other . 
Just look how he treats the ladies ! 
There 's one talking to him and he has turned away , '' she said , pointing at him . 
`` I 'd give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies . '' 
* `` He is all the rage just now . 
Suddenly everybody stirred , began talking , and pressed forward and then back , and between the two rows , which separated , the Emperor entered to the sounds of music that had immediately struck up . 
Behind him walked his host and hostess . 
He walked in rapidly , bowing to right and left as if anxious to get the first moments of the reception over . 
The band played the polonaise in vogue at that time on account of the words that had been set to it , beginning : `` Alexander , Elisaveta , all our hearts you ravish quite ... '' The Emperor passed on to the drawing room , the crowd made a rush for the doors , and several persons with excited faces hurried there and back again . 
Then the crowd hastily retired from the drawing-room door , at which the Emperor reappeared talking to the hostess . 
A young man , looking distraught , pounced down on the ladies , asking them to move aside . 
Some ladies , with faces betraying complete forgetfulness of all the rules of decorum , pushed forward to the detriment of their toilets . 
The men began to choose partners and take their places for the polonaise . 
Everyone moved back , and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawing room leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to the music . 
The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina ; then came ambassadors , ministers , and various generals , whom Peronskaya diligently named . 
More than half the ladies already had partners and were taking up , or preparing to take up , their positions for the polonaise . 
Natasha felt that she would be left with her mother and Sonya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall , not having been invited to dance . 
She stood with her slender arms hanging down , her scarcely defined bosom rising and falling regularly , and with bated breath and glittering , frightened eyes gazed straight before her , evidently prepared for the height of joy or misery . 
She was not concerned about the Emperor or any of those great people whom Peronskaya was pointing out -- she had but one thought : `` Is it possible no one will ask me , that I shall not be among the first to dance ? 
Is it possible that not one of all these men will notice me ? 
They do not even seem to see me , or if they do they look as if they were saying , ` Ah , she 's not the one I 'm after , so it 's not worth looking at her ! ' 
No , it 's impossible , '' she thought . 
`` They must know how I long to dance , how splendidly I dance , and how they would enjoy dancing with me . '' 
The strains of the polonaise , which had continued for a considerable time , had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha 's ears . 
She wanted to cry . 
Peronskaya had left them . 
The count was at the other end of the room . 
She and the countess and Sonya were standing by themselves as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd of strangers , with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone . 
Prince Andrew with a lady passed by , evidently not recognizing them . 
The handsome Anatole was smilingly talking to a partner on his arm and looked at Natasha as one looks at a wall . 
Boris passed them twice and each time turned away . 
Berg and his wife , who were not dancing , came up to them . 
This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha -- as if there were nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball . 
She did not listen to or look at Vera , who was telling her something about her own green dress . 
At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner -LRB- he had danced with three -RRB- and the music ceased . 
A worried aide-de-camp ran up to the Rostovs requesting them to stand farther back , though as it was they were already close to the wall , and from the gallery resounded the distinct , precise , enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz . 
