Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides Pierre and himself was in the room , and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness . 
`` What is it you are afraid of , Lise ? 
I do n't understand , '' said he . 
`` There , what egotists men all are : all , all egotists ! 
Just for a whim of his own , goodness only knows why , he leaves me and locks me up alone in the country . '' 
`` With my father and sister , remember , '' said Prince Andrew gently . 
`` Alone all the same , without my friends ... . 
And he expects me not to be afraid . '' 
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up , giving her not a joyful , but an animal , squirrel-like expression . 
She paused as if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre , though the gist of the matter lay in that . 
`` I still ca n't understand what you are afraid of , '' said Prince Andrew slowly , not taking his eyes off his wife . 
The princess blushed , and raised her arms with a gesture of despair . 
`` No , Andrew , I must say you have changed . 
Oh , how you have ... '' `` Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` You had better go . '' 
The princess said nothing , but suddenly her short downy lip quivered . 
Prince Andrew rose , shrugged his shoulders , and walked about the room . 
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise , now at him and now at her , moved as if about to rise too , but changed his mind . 
`` Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here ? '' 
exclaimed the little princess suddenly , her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace . 
`` I have long wanted to ask you , Andrew , why you have changed so to me ? 
What have I done to you ? 
You are going to the war and have no pity for me . 
Why is it ? '' 
`` Lise ! '' 
was all Prince Andrew said . 
But that one word expressed an entreaty , a threat , and above all conviction that she would herself regret her words . 
But she went on hurriedly : `` You treat me like an invalid or a child . 
I see it all ! 
Did you behave like that six months ago ? '' 
`` Lise , I beg you to desist , '' said Prince Andrew still more emphatically . 
Pierre , who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this , rose and approached the princess . 
He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself . 
`` Calm yourself , Princess ! 
It seems so to you because ... I assure you I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No , excuse me ! 
An outsider is out of place here ... No , do n't distress yourself ... Good-by ! '' 
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand . 
`` No , wait , Pierre ! 
The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you . '' 
`` No , he thinks only of himself , '' muttered the princess without restraining her angry tears . 
`` Lise ! '' 
said Prince Andrew dryly , raising his voice to the pitch which indicates that patience is exhausted . 
Suddenly the angry , squirrel-like expression of the princess ' pretty face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear . 
Her beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husband 's face , and her own assumed the timid , deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its drooping tail . 
`` Mon Dieu , mon Dieu ! '' 
she muttered , and lifting her dress with one hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead . 
`` Good night , Lise , '' said he , rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done to a stranger . 
The friends were silent . 
Neither cared to begin talking . 
Pierre continually glanced at Prince Andrew ; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his small hand . 
`` Let us go and have supper , '' he said with a sigh , going to the door . 
They entered the elegant , newly decorated , and luxurious dining room . 
Everything from the table napkins to the silver , china , and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married . 
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and , with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on his face , began to talk -- as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out . 
`` Never , never marry , my dear fellow ! 
That 's my advice : never marry till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of , and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she is , or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake . 
Marry when you are old and good for nothing -- or all that is good and noble in you will be lost . 
It will all be wasted on trifles . 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Do n't look at me with such surprise . 
If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future , you will feel at every step that for you all is ended , all is closed except the drawing room , where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an idiot ! 
... But what 's the good ? 
... '' and he waved his arm . 
Pierre took off his spectacles , which made his face seem different and the good-natured expression still more apparent , and gazed at his friend in amazement . 
`` My wife , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` is an excellent woman , one of those rare women with whom a man 's honor is safe ; but , O God , what would I not give now to be unmarried ! 
You are the first and only one to whom I mention this , because I like you . '' 
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who had lolled in Anna Pavlovna 's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth . 
Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement ; his eyes , in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished , now flashed with brilliant light . 
It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times , the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation . 
`` You do n't understand why I say this , '' he continued , `` but it is the whole story of life . 
You talk of Bonaparte and his career , '' said he -LRB- though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte -RRB- , `` but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal . 
He was free , he had nothing but his aim to consider , and he reached it . 
But tie yourself up with a woman and , like a chained convict , you lose all freedom ! 
And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with regret . 
Drawing rooms , gossip , balls , vanity , and triviality -- these are the enchanted circle I can not escape from . 
I am now going to the war , the greatest war there ever was , and I know nothing and am fit for nothing . 
I am very amiable and have a caustic wit , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` and at Anna Pavlovna 's they listen to me . 
And that stupid set without whom my wife can not exist , and those women ... If you only knew what those society women are , and women in general ! 
My father is right . 
Selfish , vain , stupid , trivial in everything -- that 's what women are when you see them in their true colors ! 
When you meet them in society it seems as if there were something in them , but there 's nothing , nothing , nothing ! 
No , do n't marry , my dear fellow ; do n't marry ! '' 
concluded Prince Andrew . 
`` It seems funny to me , '' said Pierre , `` that you , you should consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life . 
You have everything before you , everything . 
And you ... '' He did not finish his sentence , but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future . 
`` How can he talk like that ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
He considered his friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked , and which might be best described as strength of will . 
Pierre was always astonished at Prince Andrew 's calm manner of treating everybody , his extraordinary memory , his extensive reading -LRB- he had read everything , knew everything , and had an opinion about everything -RRB- , but above all at his capacity for work and study . 
And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew 's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation -LRB- to which he himself was particularly addicted -RRB- , he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of strength . 
Even in the best , most friendly and simplest relations of life , praise and commendation are essential , just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly . 
`` My part is played out , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` What 's the use of talking about me ? 
Let us talk about you , '' he added after a silence , smiling at his reassuring thoughts . 
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre 's face . 
`` But what is there to say about me ? '' 
said Pierre , his face relaxing into a careless , merry smile . 
