We can get a view from there and in our battery it is still bearable , '' said the adjutant . 
`` Will you come ? '' 
`` Yes , I 'll come with you , '' replied Pierre , looking round for his groom . 
It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along or being carried on stretchers . 
On that very meadow he had ridden over the day before , a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay , with his head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off . 
`` Why have n't they carried him away ? '' 
Pierre was about to ask , but seeing the stern expression of the adjutant who was also looking that way , he checked himself . 
Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with the adjutant to Raevski 's Redoubt . 
His horse lagged behind the adjutant 's and jolted him at every step . 
`` You do n't seem to be used to riding , Count ? '' 
remarked the adjutant . 
`` No it 's not that , but her action seems so jerky , '' said Pierre in a puzzled tone . 
`` Why ... she 's wounded ! '' 
said the adjutant . 
`` In the off foreleg above the knee . 
A bullet , no doubt . 
I congratulate you , Count , on your baptism of fire ! '' 
Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps , behind the artillery which had been moved forward and was in action , deafening them with the noise of firing , they came to a small wood . 
There it was cool and quiet , with a scent of autumn . 
Pierre and the adjutant dismounted and walked up the hill on foot . 
`` Is the general here ? '' 
asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll . 
`` He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way , '' someone told him , pointing to the right . 
The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now . 
`` Do n't trouble about me , '' said Pierre . 
`` I 'll go up onto the knoll if I may ? '' 
`` Yes , do . 
You 'll see everything from there and it 's less dangerous , and I 'll come for you . '' 
Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on . 
They did not meet again , and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an arm that day . 
The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwards known to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski 's Redoubt , and to the French as la grande redoute , la fatale redoute , la redoute du centre , around which tens of thousands fell , and which the French regarded as the key to the whole position . 
This redoubt consisted of a knoll , on three sides of which trenches had been dug . 
Within the entrenchment stood ten guns that were being fired through openings in the earthwork . 
In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which also fired incessantly . 
A little behind the guns stood infantry . 
When ascending that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot , on which small trenches had been dug and from which a few guns were firing , was the most important point of the battle . 
On the contrary , just because he happened to be there he thought it one of the least significant parts of the field . 
Having reached the knoll , Pierre sat down at one end of a trench surrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him with an unconsciously happy smile . 
Occasionally he rose and walked about the battery still with that same smile , trying not to obstruct the soldiers who were loading , hauling the guns , and continually running past him with bags and charges . 
The guns of that battery were being fired continually one after another with a deafening roar , enveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke . 
In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed in support , here in the battery where a small number of men busy at their work were separated from the rest by a trench , everyone experienced a common and as it were family feeling of animation . 
The intrusion of Pierre 's nonmilitary figure in a white hat made an unpleasant impression at first . 
The soldiers looked askance at him with surprise and even alarm as they went past him . 
The senior artillery officer , a tall , long-legged , pockmarked man , moved over to Pierre as if to see the action of the farthest gun and looked at him with curiosity . 
A young round-faced officer , quite a boy still and evidently only just out of the Cadet College , who was zealously commanding the two guns entrusted to him , addressed Pierre sternly . 
`` Sir , '' he said , `` permit me to ask you to stand aside . 
You must not be here . '' 
The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked at Pierre . 
But when they had convinced themselves that this man in the white hat was doing no harm , but either sat quietly on the slope of the trench with a shy smile or , politely making way for the soldiers , paced up and down the battery under fire as calmly as if he were on a boulevard , their feeling of hostile distrust gradually began to change into a kindly and bantering sympathy , such as soldiers feel for their dogs , cocks , goats , and in general for the animals that live with the regiment . 
The men soon accepted Pierre into their family , adopted him , gave him a nickname -LRB- `` our gentleman '' -RRB- , and made kindly fun of him among themselves . 
A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked around with a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrown up . 
`` And how 's it you 're not afraid , sir , really now ? '' 
a red-faced , broad-shouldered soldier asked Pierre , with a grin that disclosed a set of sound , white teeth . 
`` Are you afraid , then ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` What else do you expect ? '' 
answered the soldier . 
`` She has no mercy , you know ! 
When she comes spluttering down , out go your innards . 
One ca n't help being afraid , '' he said laughing . 
Several of the men , with bright kindly faces , stopped beside Pierre . 
They seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else , and the discovery that he did so delighted them . 
`` It 's the business of us soldiers . 
But in a gentleman it 's wonderful ! 
There 's a gentleman for you ! '' 
`` To your places ! '' 
cried the young officer to the men gathered round Pierre . 
The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for the first or second time and therefore treated both his superiors and the men with great precision and formality . 
The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growing more intense over the whole field , especially to the left where Bagration 's fleches were , but where Pierre was the smoke of the firing made it almost impossible to distinguish anything . 
Moreover , his whole attention was engrossed by watching the family circle -- separated from all else -- formed by the men in the battery . 
His first unconscious feeling of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of the battlefield was now replaced by another , especially since he had seen that soldier lying alone in the hayfield . 
Now , seated on the slope of the trench , he observed the faces of those around him . 
By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away from the battery ; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and more frequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistled around . 
But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this , and merry voices and jokes were heard on all sides . 
`` A live one ! '' 
shouted a man as a whistling shell approached . 
`` Not this way ! 
To the infantry ! '' 
added another with loud laughter , seeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports . 
`` Are you bowing to a friend , eh ? '' 
remarked another , chaffing a peasant who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over . 
Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench , looking out to see what was happening in front . 
`` They 've withdrawn the front line , it has retired , '' said they , pointing over the earthwork . 
`` Mind your own business , '' an old sergeant shouted at them . 
`` If they 've retired it 's because there 's work for them to do farther back . '' 
And the sergeant , taking one of the men by the shoulders , gave him a shove with his knee . 
This was followed by a burst of laughter . 
`` To the fifth gun , wheel it up ! '' 
came shouts from one side . 
`` Now then , all together , like bargees ! '' 
rose the merry voices of those who were moving the gun . 
`` Oh , she nearly knocked our gentleman 's hat off ! '' 
cried the red-faced humorist , showing his teeth chaffing Pierre . 
`` Awkward baggage ! '' 
he added reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannon wheel and a man 's leg . 
`` Now then , you foxes ! '' 
said another , laughing at some militiamen who , stooping low , entered the battery to carry away the wounded man . 
`` So this gruel is n't to your taste ? 
Oh , you crows ! 
You 're scared ! '' 
