Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it . 
He acted as he did when hunting , without reflecting or considering . 
He saw the dragoons near and that they were galloping in disorder ; he knew they could not withstand an attack -- knew there was only that moment and that if he let it slip it would not return . 
The bullets were whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horse was so eager to go that he could not restrain himself . 
He touched his horse , gave the word of command , and immediately , hearing behind him the tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron , rode at full trot downhill toward the dragoons . 
Hardly had they reached the bottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to a gallop , which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlans and the French dragoons who galloped after them . 
The dragoons were now close at hand . 
On seeing the hussars , the foremost began to turn , while those behind began to halt . 
With the same feeling with which he had galloped across the path of a wolf , Rostov gave rein to his Donets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons ' disordered lines . 
One Uhlan stopped , another who was on foot flung himself to the ground to avoid being knocked over , and a riderless horse fell in among the hussars . 
Nearly all the French dragoons were galloping back . 
Rostov , picking out one on a gray horse , dashed after him . 
On the way he came upon a bush , his gallant horse cleared it , and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw that he would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected . 
That Frenchman , by his uniform an officer , was going at a gallop , crouching on his gray horse and urging it on with his saber . 
In another moment Rostov 's horse dashed its breast against the hindquarters of the officer 's horse , almost knocking it over , and at the same instant Rostov , without knowing why , raised his saber and struck the Frenchman with it . 
The instant he had done this , all Rostov 's animation vanished . 
The officer fell , not so much from the blow -- which had but slightly cut his arm above the elbow -- as from the shock to his horse and from fright . 
Rostov reined in his horse , and his eyes sought his foe to see whom he had vanquished . 
The French dragoon officer was hopping with one foot on the ground , the other being caught in the stirrup . 
His eyes , screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected another blow , gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror . 
His pale and mud-stained face -- fair and young , with a dimple in the chin and light-blue eyes -- was not an enemy 's face at all suited to a battlefield , but a most ordinary , homelike face . 
Before Rostov had decided what to do with him , the officer cried , `` I surrender ! '' 
He hurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup and did not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov 's face . 
Some hussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into the saddle . 
On all sides , the hussars were busy with the dragoons ; one was wounded , but though his face was bleeding , he would not give up his horse ; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms round him ; a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse . 
In front , the French infantry were firing as they ran . 
The hussars galloped hastily back with their prisoners . 
Rostov galloped back with the rest , aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in his heart . 
Something vague and confused , which he could not at all account for , had come over him with the capture of that officer and the blow he had dealt him . 
Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars , sent for Rostov , thanked him , and said he would report his gallant deed to the Emperor and would recommend him for a St. George 's Cross . 
When sent for by Count Ostermann , Rostov , remembering that he had charged without orders , felt sure his commander was sending for him to punish him for breach of discipline . 
Ostermann 's flattering words and promise of a reward should therefore have struck him all the more pleasantly , but he still felt that same vaguely disagreeable feeling of moral nausea . 
`` But what on earth is worrying me ? '' 
he asked himself as he rode back from the general . 
`` Ilyin ? 
No , he 's safe . 
Have I disgraced myself in any way ? 
No , that 's not it . '' 
Something else , resembling remorse , tormented him . 
`` Yes , oh yes , that French officer with the dimple . 
And I remember how my arm paused when I raised it . '' 
Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them to have a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin . 
He was sitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and looked anxiously about him ; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called a wound . 
He glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved his hand in greeting . 
Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling , as of shame . 
All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed that Rostov , without being dull or angry , was silent , thoughtful , and preoccupied . 
He drank reluctantly , tried to remain alone , and kept turning something over in his mind . 
Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his , which to his amazement had gained him the St. George 's Cross and even given him a reputation for bravery , and there was something he could not at all understand . 
`` So others are even more afraid than I am ! '' 
he thought . 
`` So that 's all there is in what is called heroism ! 
And heroism ! 
And did I do it for my country 's sake ? 
And how was he to blame , with his dimple and blue eyes ? 
And how frightened he was ! 
He thought that I should kill him . 
Why should I kill him ? 
My hand trembled . 
And they have given me a St. George 's Cross ... . 
I ca n't make it out at all . '' 
But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach no clear solution of what puzzled him so , the wheel of fortune in the service , as often happens , turned in his favor . 
After the affair at Ostrovna he was brought into notice , received command of an hussar battalion , and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen . 
On receiving news of Natasha 's illness , the countess , though not quite well yet and still weak , went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the household , and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna 's house to their own and settled down in town . 
Natasha 's illness was so serious that , fortunately for her and for her parents , the consideration of all that had caused the illness , her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement , receded into the background . 
She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider in how far she was to blame for what had happened . 
She could not eat or sleep , grew visibly thinner , coughed , and , as the doctors made them feel , was in danger . 
They could not think of anything but how to help her . 
Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation , talked much in French , German , and Latin , blamed one another , and prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them , but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease Natasha was suffering from , as no disease suffered by a live man can be known , for every living person has his own peculiarities and always has his own peculiar , personal , novel , complicated disease , unknown to medicine -- not a disease of the lungs , liver , skin , heart , nerves , and so on mentioned in medical books , but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs . 
This simple thought could not occur to the doctors -LRB- as it can not occur to a wizard that he is unable to work his charms -RRB- because the business of their lives was to cure , and they received money for it and had spent the best years of their lives on that business . 
But , above all , that thought was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful , as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family . 
Their usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for the most part harmful -LRB- the harm was scarcely perceptible , as they were given in small doses -RRB- , but they were useful , necessary , and indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who loved her -- and that is why there are , and always will be , pseudo-healers , wise women , homeopaths , and allopaths . 
They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief , for sympathy , and that something should be done , which is felt by those who are suffering . 
They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child , when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt . 
A child knocks itself and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed , and it feels better when this is done . 
The child can not believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain , and the hope of relief and the expression of its mother 's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it . 
The doctors were of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump , assuring her that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist 's in the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box of a ruble and seventy kopeks , and if she took those powders in boiled water at intervals of precisely two hours , neither more nor less . 
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done , how would they have looked , if nothing had been done , if there had not been those pills to give by the clock , the warm drinks , the chicken cutlets , and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors , the carrying out of which supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle ? 
How would the count have borne his dearly loved daughter 's illness had he not known that it was costing him a thousand rubles , and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her , or had he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there , and had he not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms , but Frise had , and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better ? 
What would the countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly obeying the doctor 's orders ? 
`` You 'll never get well like that , '' she would say , forgetting her grief in her vexation , `` if you wo n't obey the doctor and take your medicine at the right time ! 
You must n't trifle with it , you know , or it may turn to pneumonia , '' she would go on , deriving much comfort from the utterance of that foreign word , incomprehensible to others as well as to herself . 
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had not undressed during the first three nights , in order to be ready to carry out all the doctor 's injunctions with precision , and that she still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered ? 
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices were being made for her sake , and to know that she had to take medicine at certain hours , though she declared that no medicine would cure her and that it was all nonsense . 
And it was even pleasant to be able to show , by disregarding the orders , that she did not believe in medical treatment and did not value her life . 
The doctor came every day , felt her pulse , looked at her tongue , and regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her . 
But when he had gone into another room , to which the countess hurriedly followed him , he assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though there was danger , he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and one must wait and see , that the malady was chiefly mental , but ... And the countess , trying to conceal the action from herself and from him , slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient with a more tranquil mind . 
The symptoms of Natasha 's illness were that she ate little , slept little , coughed , and was always low-spirited . 
The doctors said that she could not get on without medical treatment , so they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the town , and the Rostovs did not move to the country that summer of 1812 . 
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of such things made a large collection , and in spite of being deprived of the country life to which she was accustomed , youth prevailed . 
Natasha 's grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life , it ceased to press so painfully on her heart , it gradually faded into the past , and she began to recover physically . 
Natasha was calmer but no happier . 
She not merely avoided all external forms of pleasure -- balls , promenades , concerts , and theaters - but she never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter . 
She could not sing . 
As soon as she began to laugh , or tried to sing by herself , tears choked her : tears of remorse , tears at the recollection of those pure times which could never return , tears of vexation that she should so uselessly have ruined her young life which might have been so happy . 
Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like a blasphemy , in face of her sorrow . 
Without any need of self-restraint , no wish to coquet ever entered her head . 
She said and felt at that time that no man was more to her than Nastasya Ivanovna , the buffoon . 
Something stood sentinel within her and forbade her every joy . 
Besides , she had lost all the old interests of her carefree girlish life that had been so full of hope . 
The previous autumn , the hunting , `` Uncle , '' and the Christmas holidays spent with Nicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest and most painfully . 
