`` The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead , spikes the guns , and the bridge is taken ! 
But what is best of all , '' he went on , his excitement subsiding under the delightful interest of his own story , `` is that the sergeant in charge of the cannon which was to give the signal to fire the mines and blow up the bridge , this sergeant , seeing that the French troops were running onto the bridge , was about to fire , but Lannes stayed his hand . 
The sergeant , who was evidently wiser than his general , goes up to Auersperg and says : ` Prince , you are being deceived , here are the French ! ' 
Murat , seeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed to speak , turns to Auersperg with feigned astonishment -LRB- he is a true Gascon -RRB- and says : ' I do n't recognize the world-famous Austrian discipline , if you allow a subordinate to address you like that ! ' 
It was a stroke of genius . 
Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and orders the sergeant to be arrested . 
Come , you must own that this affair of the Thabor Bridge is delightful ! 
It is not exactly stupidity , nor rascality ... '' * Bridgehead . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he ought to be firing at the enemy . 
`` It may be treachery , '' said Prince Andrew , vividly imagining the gray overcoats , wounds , the smoke of gunpowder , the sounds of firing , and the glory that awaited him . 
`` Not that either . 
That puts the court in too bad a light , '' replied Bilibin . 
`` It 's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity : it is just as at Ulm ... it is ... '' -- he seemed to be trying to find the right expression . 
`` C'est ... c'est du Mack . 
Nous sommes mackes -LSB- It is ... it is a bit of Mack . 
We are Macked -RSB- , '' he concluded , feeling that he had produced a good epigram , a fresh one that would be repeated . 
His hitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure , and with a slight smile he began to examine his nails . 
`` Where are you off to ? '' 
he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who had risen and was going toward his room . 
`` I am going away . '' 
`` Where to ? '' 
`` To the army . '' 
`` But you meant to stay another two days ? '' 
`` But now I am off at once . '' 
And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure went to his room . 
`` Do you know , mon cher , '' said Bilibin following him , `` I have been thinking about you . 
Why are you going ? '' 
And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinkles vanished from his face . 
Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply . 
`` Why are you going ? 
I know you think it your duty to gallop back to the army now that it is in danger . 
I understand that . 
Mon cher , it is heroism ! '' 
`` Not at all , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` But as you are a philosopher , be a consistent one , look at the other side of the question and you will see that your duty , on the contrary , is to take care of yourself . 
Leave it to those who are no longer fit for anything else ... . 
You have not been ordered to return and have not been dismissed from here ; therefore , you can stay and go with us wherever our ill luck takes us . 
They say we are going to Olmutz , and Olmutz is a very decent town . 
You and I will travel comfortably in my caleche . '' 
`` Do stop joking , Bilibin , '' cried Bolkonski . 
`` I am speaking sincerely as a friend ! 
Consider ! 
Where and why are you going , when you might remain here ? 
You are faced by one of two things , '' and the skin over his left temple puckered , `` either you will not reach your regiment before peace is concluded , or you will share defeat and disgrace with Kutuzov 's whole army . '' 
And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple , feeling that the dilemma was insoluble . 
`` I can not argue about it , '' replied Prince Andrew coldly , but he thought : `` I am going to save the army . '' 
`` My dear fellow , you are a hero ! '' 
said Bilibin . 
That same night , having taken leave of the Minister of War , Bolkonski set off to rejoin the army , not knowing where he would find it and fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems . 
In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up , and the heavy baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz . 
Near Hetzelsdorf Prince Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army was moving with great haste and in the greatest disorder . 
The road was so obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in a carriage . 
Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossack commander , and hungry and weary , making his way past the baggage wagons , rode in search of the commander in chief and of his own luggage . 
Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached him as he went along , and the appearance of the troops in their disorderly flight confirmed these rumors . 
`` Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee des extremites de l'univers , nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort -- -LRB- le sort de l'armee d'Ulm -RRB- . '' 
* He remembered these words in Bonaparte 's address to his army at the beginning of the campaign , and they awoke in him astonishment at the genius of his hero , a feeling of wounded pride , and a hope of glory . 
`` And should there be nothing left but to die ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Well , if need be , I shall do it no worse than others . '' 
* `` That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of the earth by English gold , we shall cause to share the same fate -- -LRB- the fate of the army at Ulm -RRB- . '' 
He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass of detachments , carts , guns , artillery , and again baggage wagons and vehicles of all kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddy road , three and sometimes four abreast . 
From all sides , behind and before , as far as ear could reach , there were the rattle of wheels , the creaking of carts and gun carriages , the tramp of horses , the crack of whips , shouts , the urging of horses , and the swearing of soldiers , orderlies , and officers . 
All along the sides of the road fallen horses were to be seen , some flayed , some not , and broken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers sat waiting for something , and again soldiers straggling from their companies , crowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages , or returned from them dragging sheep , fowls , hay , and bulging sacks . 
At each ascent or descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din of shouting more incessant . 
Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mud pushed the guns and wagons themselves . 
Whips cracked , hoofs slipped , traces broke , and lungs were strained with shouting . 
The officers directing the march rode backward and forward between the carts . 
Their voices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by their faces that they despaired of the possibility of checking this disorder . 
`` Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army , '' thought Bolkonski , recalling Bilibin 's words . 
Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was , he rode up to a convoy . 
Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horse vehicle , evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any available materials and looking like something between a cart , a cabriolet , and a caleche . 
A soldier was driving , and a woman enveloped in shawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle . 
Prince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a soldier when his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of the woman in the vehicle . 
An officer in charge of transport was beating the soldier who was driving the woman 's vehicle for trying to get ahead of others , and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron of the equipage . 
The woman screamed piercingly . 
Seeing Prince Andrew she leaned out from behind the apron and , waving her thin arms from under the woolen shawl , cried : `` Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
... For heaven 's sake ... Protect me ! 
What will become of us ? 
I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventh Chasseurs ... . 
They wo n't let us pass , we are left behind and have lost our people ... '' `` I 'll flatten you into a pancake ! '' 
shouted the angry officer to the soldier . 
`` Turn back with your slut ! '' 
`` Mr. Aide-de-camp ! 
Help me ! 
... What does it all mean ? '' 
screamed the doctor 's wife . 
`` Kindly let this cart pass . 
Do n't you see it 's a woman ? '' 
said Prince Andrew riding up to the officer . 
The officer glanced at him , and without replying turned again to the soldier . 
`` I 'll teach you to push on ! 
... Back ! '' 
`` Let them pass , I tell you ! '' 
repeated Prince Andrew , compressing his lips . 
`` And who are you ? '' 
cried the officer , turning on him with tipsy rage , `` who are you ? 
Are you in command here ? 
Eh ? 
I am commander here , not you ! 
