And she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne , with her ribbon and pretty face , and her unusually animated look which was fixed on him , but him she could not see , she only saw something large , brilliant , and handsome moving toward her as she entered the room . 
Prince Vasili approached first , and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her hand and answered his question by saying that , on the contrary , she remembered him quite well . 
Then Anatole came up to her . 
She still could not see him . 
She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly , and she touched with her lips a white forehead , over which was beautiful light-brown hair smelling of pomade . 
When she looked up at him she was struck by his beauty . 
Anatole stood with his right thumb under a button of his uniform , his chest expanded and his back drawn in , slightly swinging one foot , and , with his head a little bent , looked with beaming face at the princess without speaking and evidently not thinking about her at all . 
Anatole was not quick-witted , nor ready or eloquent in conversation , but he had the faculty , so invaluable in society , of composure and imperturbable self-possession . 
If a man lacking in self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction and betrays a consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and an anxiety to find something to say , the effect is bad . 
But Anatole was dumb , swung his foot , and smilingly examined the princess ' hair . 
It was evident that he could be silent in this way for a very long time . 
`` If anyone finds this silence inconvenient , let him talk , but I do n't want to , '' he seemed to say . 
Besides this , in his behavior to women Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in them curiosity , awe , and even love -- a supercilious consciousness of his own superiority . 
It was was as if he said to them : `` I know you , I know you , but why should I bother about you ? 
You 'd be only too glad , of course . '' 
Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women - even probably he did not , for in general he thought very little -- but his looks and manner gave that impression . 
The princess felt this , and as if wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect to interest him , she turned to his father . 
The conversation was general and animated , thanks to Princess Lise 's voice and little downy lip that lifted over her white teeth . 
She met Prince Vasili with that playful manner often employed by lively chatty people , and consisting in the assumption that between the person they so address and themselves there are some semi-private , long-established jokes and amusing reminiscences , though no such reminiscences really exist -- just as none existed in this case . 
Prince Vasili readily adopted her tone and the little princess also drew Anatole , whom she hardly knew , into these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felt herself pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences . 
`` Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all to ourselves , dear prince , '' said the little princess -LRB- of course , in French -RRB- to Prince Vasili . 
`` It 's not as at Annette 's * receptions where you always ran away ; you remember cette chere Annette ! '' 
* Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Ah , but you wo n't talk politics to me like Annette ! '' 
`` And our little tea table ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ! '' 
`` Why is it you were never at Annette 's ? '' 
the little princess asked Anatole . 
`` Ah , I know , I know , '' she said with a sly glance , `` your brother Hippolyte told me about your goings on . 
Oh ! '' 
and she shook her finger at him , `` I have even heard of your doings in Paris ! '' 
`` And did n't Hippolyte tell you ? '' 
asked Prince Vasili , turning to his son and seizing the little princess ' arm as if she would have run away and he had just managed to catch her , `` did n't he tell you how he himself was pining for the dear princess , and how she showed him the door ? 
Oh , she is a pearl among women , Princess , '' he added , turning to Princess Mary . 
When Paris was mentioned , Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seized the opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections . 
She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long since Anatole had left Paris and how he had liked that city . 
Anatole answered the Frenchwoman very readily and , looking at her with a smile , talked to her about her native land . 
When he saw the pretty little Bourienne , Anatole came to the conclusion that he would not find Bald Hills dull either . 
`` Not at all bad ! '' 
he thought , examining her , `` not at all bad , that little companion ! 
I hope she will bring her along with her when we 're married , la petite est gentille . '' 
* * The little one is charming . 
The old prince dressed leisurely in his study , frowning and considering what he was to do . 
The coming of these visitors annoyed him . 
`` What are Prince Vasili and that son of his to me ? 
Prince Vasili is a shallow braggart and his son , no doubt , is a fine specimen , '' he grumbled to himself . 
What angered him was that the coming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettled question he always tried to stifle , one about which he always deceived himself . 
The question was whether he could ever bring himself to part from his daughter and give her to a husband . 
The prince never directly asked himself that question , knowing beforehand that he would have to answer it justly , and justice clashed not only with his feelings but with the very possibility of life . 
Life without Princess Mary , little as he seemed to value her , was unthinkable to him . 
`` And why should she marry ? '' 
he thought . 
`` To be unhappy for certain . 
There 's Lise , married to Andrew -- a better husband one would think could hardly be found nowadays -- but is she contented with her lot ? 
And who would marry Marie for love ? 
Plain and awkward ! 
They 'll take her for her connections and wealth . 
Are there no women living unmarried , and even the happier for it ? '' 
So thought Prince Bolkonski while dressing , and yet the question he was always putting off demanded an immediate answer . 
Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evident intention of proposing , and today or tomorrow he would probably ask for an answer . 
His birth and position in society were not bad . 
`` Well , I 've nothing against it , '' the prince said to himself , `` but he must be worthy of her . 
And that is what we shall see . '' 
`` That is what we shall see ! 
That is what we shall see ! '' 
he added aloud . 
He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step , glancing rapidly round the company . 
He noticed the change in the little princess ' dress , Mademoiselle Bourienne 's ribbon , Princess Mary 's unbecoming coiffure , Mademoiselle Bourienne 's and Anatole 's smiles , and the loneliness of his daughter amid the general conversation . 
`` Got herself up like a fool ! '' 
he thought , looking irritably at her . 
`` She is shameless , and he ignores her ! '' 
He went straight up to Prince Vasili . 
`` Well ! 
How d'ye do ? 
How d'ye do ? 
Glad to see you ! '' 
`` Friendship laughs at distance , '' began Prince Vasili in his usual rapid , self-confident , familiar tone . 
`` Here is my second son ; please love and befriend him . '' 
Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole . 
`` Fine young fellow ! 
Fine young fellow ! '' 
he said . 
`` Well , come and kiss me , '' and he offered his cheek . 
Anatole kissed the old man , and looked at him with curiosity and perfect composure , waiting for a display of the eccentricities his father had told him to expect . 
Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of the sofa and , drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili , pointed to it and began questioning him about political affairs and news . 
He seemed to listen attentively to what Prince Vasili said , but kept glancing at Princess Mary . 
`` And so they are writing from Potsdam already ? '' 
he said , repeating Prince Vasili 's last words . 
Then rising , he suddenly went up to his daughter . 
`` Is it for visitors you 've got yourself up like that , eh ? '' 
said he . 
`` Fine , very fine ! 
You have done up your hair in this new way for the visitors , and before the visitors I tell you that in future you are never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent . '' 
`` It was my fault , mon pere , '' interceded the little princess , with a blush . 
`` You must do as you please , '' said Prince Bolkonski , bowing to his daughter-in-law , `` but she need not make a fool of herself , she 's plain enough as it is . '' 
And he sat down again , paying no more attention to his daughter , who was reduced to tears . 
`` On the contrary , that coiffure suits the princess very well , '' said Prince Vasili . 
`` Now you , young prince , what 's your name ? '' 
said Prince Bolkonski , turning to Anatole , `` come here , let us talk and get acquainted . '' 
