They say this , not at all suspecting that thousands of years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers , but has never been denied . 
They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination of one side of it . 
For the fact that , from the point of view of observation , reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain , and that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals at some unknown period of time , only explains from a fresh side the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and philosophic theories -- that from the point of view of reason man is subject to the law of necessity ; but it does not advance by a hair 's breadth the solution of the question , which has another , opposite , side , based on the consciousness of freedom . 
If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time , that is as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a certain period of time -LRB- in the first case the unknown quantity is the time , in the second case it is the origin -RRB- ; and the question of how man 's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of necessity to which he is subject can not be solved by comparative physiology and zoology , for in a frog , a rabbit , or an ape , we can observe only the muscular nervous activity , but in man we observe consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity . 
The naturalists and their followers , thinking they can solve this question , are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of a church who , availing themselves of the absence of the chief superintendent of the work , should in an access of zeal plaster over the windows , icons , woodwork , and still unbuttressed walls , and should be delighted that from their point of view as plasterers , everything is now so smooth and regular . 
For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability , history has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the question is dealt with , that for history this question does not refer to the essence of man 's free will but its manifestation in the past and under certain conditions . 
In regard to this question , history stands to the other sciences as experimental science stands to abstract science . 
The subject for history is not man 's will itself but our presentation of it . 
And so for history , the insoluble mystery presented by the incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does for theology , ethics , and philosophy . 
History surveys a presentation of man 's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already taken place . 
In actual life each historic event , each human action , is very clearly and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction , although each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory . 
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions , the philosophy of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other sciences . 
Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and inevitability in themselves , and then ranging the phenomena of life under those definitions , history should deduce a definition of the conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear dependent on these two elements . 
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider , we always regard it as the result partly of man 's free will and partly of the law of inevitability . 
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions of the barbarians , or of the decrees of Napoleon III , or of someone 's action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his walk , we are unconscious of any contradiction . 
The degree of freedom and inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined for us . 
Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to differences in the point of view from which we regard the event , but every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and inevitability . 
In every action we examine we see a certain measure of freedom and a certain measure of inevitability . 
And always the more freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive , and the more inevitability the less freedom . 
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases according to the point of view from which the action is regarded , but their relation is always one of inverse proportion . 
A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him ; or a hungry mother exhausted by feeding her baby , who steals some food ; or a man trained to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless man -- seem less guilty , that is , less free and more subject to the law of necessity , to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were placed , and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself drowning , that the mother was hungry , that the soldier was in the ranks , and so on . 
Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty and his action more due to the law of inevitability , to someone who considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who examined it the day after it was committed . 
And in the same way every action of an insane , intoxicated , or highly excited man appears less free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him who committed the action , and seems more free and less inevitable to one who does not know it . 
In all these cases the conception of freedom is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is correspondingly decreased or increased , according to the point of view from which the action is regarded . 
So that the greater the conception of necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa . 
Religion , the common sense of mankind , the science of jurisprudence , and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and freedom . 
All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations : -LRB- 1 -RRB- The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- His relation to time . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- His relation to the causes leading to the action . 
The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man 's relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness of our understanding of the definite position occupied by the man in relation to everything coexisting with him . 
This is what makes it evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity than one standing on dry ground , and that makes the actions of a man closely connected with others in a thickly populated district , or of one bound by family , official , or business duties , seem certainly less free and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and seclusion . 
If we consider a man alone , apart from his relation to everything around him , each action of his seems to us free . 
But if we see his relation to anything around him , if we see his connection with anything whatever -- with a man who speaks to him , a book he reads , the work on which he is engaged , even with the air he breathes or the light that falls on the things about him -- we see that each of these circumstances has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity . 
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that weighs on him increases . 
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place the man 's action occupies in time . 
That is the ground which makes the fall of the first man , resulting in the production of the human race , appear evidently less free than a man 's entry into marriage today . 
It is the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago and are connected with me in time can not seem to me as free as the life of a contemporary , the consequences of which are still unknown to me . 
The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance of the action and our judgment of it . 
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same circumstances as those I am in now , my action appears to me undoubtedly free . 
But if I examine an act performed a month ago , then being in different circumstances , I can not help recognizing that if that act had not been committed much that resulted from it - good , agreeable , and even essential -- would not have taken place . 
If I reflect on an action still more remote , ten years ago or more , then the consequences of my action are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have happened had that action not been performed . 
The farther I go back in memory , or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my judgment , the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my action . 
In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity . 
A contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the known participants , but with a more remote event we already see its inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible . 
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do they appear . 
The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the crafty conduct of Bismarck , and so on . 
The Napoleonic wars still seem to us , though already questionably , to be the outcome of their heroes ' will . 
But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite place in history and without which we can not imagine the modern history of Europe , though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared as merely due to the will of certain people . 
In regard to the migration of the peoples it does not enter anyone 's head today to suppose that the renovation of the European world depended on Attila 's caprice . 
The farther back in history the object of our observation lies , the more doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and the more manifest the law of inevitability . 
The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason , in which each phenomenon comprehended , and therefore man 's every action , must have its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of what will follow . 
The better we are acquainted with the physiological , psychological , and historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled , and the more correctly we perceive the physiological , psychological , and historical causes of the action , and the simpler the action we are observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in question , the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our actions and those of others appear . 
When we do not at all understand the cause of an action , whether a crime , a good action , or even one that is simply nonmoral , we ascribe a greater amount of freedom to it . 
In the case of a crime we most urgently demand the punishment for such an act ; in the case of a virtuous act we rate its merit most highly . 
In an indifferent case we recognize in it more individuality , originality , and independence . 
But if even one of the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime , or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act , or the freedom of the apparently original action . 
That a criminal was reared among male factors mitigates his fault in our eyes . 
The self-sacrifice of a father or mother , or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward , is more comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice , and therefore seems less deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will . 
The founder of a sect or party , or an inventor , impresses us less when we know how or by what the way was prepared for his activity . 
If we have a large range of examples , if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the correlation of cause and effect in people 's actions , their actions appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we connect the effects with the causes . 
If we examined simple actions and had a vast number of such actions under observation , our conception of their inevitability would be still greater . 
The dishonest conduct of the son of a dishonest father , the misconduct of a woman who had fallen into bad company , a drunkard 's relapse into drunkenness , and so on are actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause . 
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage of mental development , like a child , a madman , or a simpleton -- then , knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and intelligence in question , we see so large an element of necessity and so little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action we can foretell the result . 
On these three considerations alone is based the conception of irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted by all legislative codes . 
The responsibility appears greater or less according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in which the man was placed whose action is being judged , and according to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the action and its investigation , and according to the greater or lesser understanding of the causes that led to the action . 
Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the external world , the greater or lesser remoteness of time , and the greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we contemplate a man 's life . 
So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the external world is well known , where the time between the action and its examination is great , and where the causes of the action are most accessible , we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a minimum of free will . 
If we examine a man little dependent on external conditions , whose action was performed very recently , and the causes of whose action are beyond our ken , we get the conception of a minimum of inevitability and a maximum of freedom . 
In neither case -- however we may change our point of view , however plain we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external world , however inaccessible it may be to us , however long or short the period of time , however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes of the action may be -- can we ever conceive either complete freedom or complete necessity . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the influence of the external world , we never get a conception of freedom in space . 
Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds him and by his own body . 
I lift my arm and let it fall . 
My action seems to me free ; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every direction , I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from the construction of my own body . 
I chose one out of all the possible directions because in it there were fewest obstacles . 
For my action to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles . 
To conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space , which is evidently impossible . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the deed , we never get a conception of freedom in time . 
For if I examine an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not being free , for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was committed . 
Can I lift my arm ? 
I lift it , but ask myself : could I have abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed ? 
To convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment . 
But I am not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the question . 
Time has gone by which I could not detain , the arm I then lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting , nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me . 
The moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable , and at that moment I could make only one movement , and whatever movement I made would be the only one . 
That I did not lift my arm a moment later does not prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then . 
And since I could make only one movement at that single moment of time , it could not have been any other . 
To imagine it as free , it is necessary to imagine it in the present , on the boundary between the past and the future -- that is , outside time , which is impossible . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be increased , we never reach a conception of complete freedom , that is , an absence of cause . 
However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the expression of will in any action , our own or another 's , the first demand of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause , for without a cause no phenomenon is conceivable . 
I raise my arm to perform an action independently of any cause , but my wish to perform an action without a cause is the cause of my action . 
But even if -- imagining a man quite exempt from all influences , examining only his momentary action in the present , unevoked by any cause -- we were to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled zero , we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete freedom in man , for a being uninfluenced by the external world , standing outside of time and independent of cause , is no longer a man . 
In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space in which man is situated , that knowledge can never be complete , for the number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space . 
And therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined , there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom remains . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- However we may prolong the period of time between the action we are examining and the judgment upon it , that period will be finite , while time is infinite , and so in this respect too there can never be absolute inevitability . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action , we shall never know the whole chain since it is endless , and so again we never reach absolute inevitability . 
But besides this , even if , admitting the remaining minimum of freedom to equal zero , we assumed in some given case -- as for instance in that of a dying man , an unborn babe , or an idiot -- complete absence of freedom , by so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are examining , for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man . 
And so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as the conception of a man 's completely free action . 
And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of inevitability without any freedom , we must assume the knowledge of an infinite number of space relations , an infinitely long period of time , and an infinite series of causes . 
To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of inevitability , we must imagine him all alone , beyond space , beyond time , and free from dependence on cause . 
