Thrust them aside as she would , questions continually recurred to her as to how she would order her life now , after that . 
These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knew it . 
She knew that the sole weapon against him was prayer , and she tried to pray . 
She assumed an attitude of prayer , looked at the icons , repeated the words of a prayer , but she could not pray . 
She felt that a different world had now taken possession of her -- the life of a world of strenuous and free activity , quite opposed to the spiritual world in which till now she had been confined and in which her greatest comfort had been prayer . 
She could not pray , could not weep , and worldly cares took possession of her . 
It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo . 
News of the approach of the French came from all sides , and in one village , ten miles from Bogucharovo , a homestead had been looted by French marauders . 
The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince ; the provincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Mary to persuade her to get away as quickly as possible , and the head of the rural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing , saying that the French were only some twenty-five miles away , that French proclamations were circulating in the villages , and that if the princess did not take her father away before the fifteenth , he could not answer for the consequences . 
The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth . 
The cares of preparation and giving orders , for which everyone came to her , occupied her all day . 
She spent the night of the fourteenth as usual , without undressing , in the room next to the one where the prince lay . 
Several times , waking up , she heard his groans and muttering , the creak of his bed , and the steps of Tikhon and the doctor when they turned him over . 
Several times she listened at the door , and it seemed to her that his mutterings were louder than usual and that they turned him over oftener . 
She could not sleep and several times went to the door and listened , wishing to enter but not deciding to do so . 
Though he did not speak , Princess Mary saw and knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was to him . 
She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the look she sometimes involuntarily fixed on him . 
She knew that her going in during the night at an unusual hour would irritate him . 
But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid of losing him . 
She recalled all her life with him and in every word and act of his found an expression of his love of her . 
Occasionally amid these memories temptations of the devil would surge into her imagination : thoughts of how things would be after his death , and how her new , liberated life would be ordered . 
But she drove these thoughts away with disgust . 
Toward morning he became quiet and she fell asleep . 
She woke late . 
That sincerity which often comes with waking showed her clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father 's illness . 
On waking she listened to what was going on behind the door and , hearing him groan , said to herself with a sigh that things were still the same . 
`` But what could have happened ? 
What did I want ? 
I want his death ! '' 
she cried with a feeling of loathing for herself . 
She washed , dressed , said her prayers , and went out to the porch . 
In front of it stood carriages without horses and things were being packed into the vehicles . 
It was a warm , gray morning . 
Princess Mary stopped at the porch , still horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange her thoughts before going to her father . 
The doctor came downstairs and went out to her . 
`` He is a little better today , '' said he . 
`` I was looking for you . 
One can make out something of what he is saying . 
His head is clearer . 
Come in , he is asking for you ... '' Princess Mary 's heart beat so violently at this news that she grew pale and leaned against the wall to keep from falling . 
To see him , talk to him , feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul was overflowing with those dreadful , wicked temptations , was a torment of joy and terror . 
`` Come , '' said the doctor . 
Princess Mary entered her father 's room and went up to his bed . 
He was lying on his back propped up high , and his small bony hands with their knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt ; his left eye gazed straight before him , his right eye was awry , and his brows and lips motionless . 
He seemed altogether so thin , small , and pathetic . 
His face seemed to have shriveled or melted ; his features had grown smaller . 
Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand . 
His left hand pressed hers so that she understood that he had long been waiting for her to come . 
He twitched her hand , and his brows and lips quivered angrily . 
She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her . 
When she changed her position so that his left eye could see her face he calmed down , not taking his eyes off her for some seconds . 
Then his lips and tongue moved , sounds came , and he began to speak , gazing timidly and imploringly at her , evidently afraid that she might not understand . 
Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him . 
The comic efforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and with difficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat . 
He said something , repeating the same words several times . 
She could not understand them , but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringly repeated the words he uttered . 
`` Mmm ... ar ... ate ... ate ... '' he repeated several times . 
It was quite impossible to understand these sounds . 
The doctor thought he had guessed them , and inquiringly repeated : `` Mary , are you afraid ? '' 
The prince shook his head , again repeated the same sounds . 
`` My mind , my mind aches ? '' 
questioned Princess Mary . 
He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this , took her hand , and began pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying to find the right place for it . 
`` Always thoughts ... about you ... thoughts ... '' he then uttered much more clearly than he had done before , now that he was sure of being understood . 
Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand , trying to hide her sobs and tears . 
He moved his hand over her hair . 
`` I have been calling you all night ... '' he brought out . 
`` If only I had known ... '' she said through her tears . 
`` I was afraid to come in . '' 
He pressed her hand . 
`` Were n't you asleep ? '' 
`` No , I did not sleep , '' said Princess Mary , shaking her head . 
Unconsciously imitating her father , she now tried to express herself as he did , as much as possible by signs , and her tongue too seemed to move with difficulty . 
`` Dear one ... Dearest ... '' Princess Mary could not quite make out what he had said , but from his look it was clear that he had uttered a tender caressing word such as he had never used to her before . 
`` Why did n't you come in ? '' 
`` And I was wishing for his death ! '' 
thought Princess Mary . 
He was silent awhile . 
`` Thank you ... daughter dear ! 
... for all , for all ... forgive ! 
... thank you ! 
... forgive ! 
... thank you ! 
... '' and tears began to flow from his eyes . 
`` Call Andrew ! '' 
he said suddenly , and a childish , timid expression of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke . 
He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless . 
So at least it seemed to Princess Mary . 
`` I have a letter from him , '' she replied . 
He glanced at her with timid surprise . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` He 's with the army , Father , at Smolensk . '' 
He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time . 
Then as if in answer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understood and remembered everything , he nodded his head and reopened his eyes . 
`` Yes , '' he said , softly and distinctly . 
`` Russia has perished . 
They 've destroyed her . '' 
And he began to sob , and again tears flowed from his eyes . 
Princess Mary could no longer restrain herself and wept while she gazed at his face . 
Again he closed his eyes . 
