Sounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the village . 
`` He 's coming ! 
He 's coming ! '' 
shouted a Cossack standing at the gate . 
Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate , at which a knot of soldiers -LRB- a guard of honor -RRB- was standing , and they saw Kutuzov coming down the street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse . 
A huge suite of generals rode behind him . 
Barclay was riding almost beside him , and a crowd of officers ran after and around them shouting , `` Hurrah ! '' 
His adjutants galloped into the yard before him . 
Kutuzov was impatiently urging on his horse , which ambled smoothly under his weight , and he raised his hand to his white Horse Guard 's cap with a red band and no peak , nodding his head continually . 
When he came up to the guard of honor , a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearing decorations , who were giving him the salute , he looked at them silently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze of a commander and then turned to the crowd of generals and officers surrounding him . 
Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression , he shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity . 
`` And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat ! 
Well , good-by , General , '' he added , and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew and Denisov . 
`` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! 
hurrah ! '' 
shouted those behind him . 
Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still more corpulent , flaccid , and fat . 
But the bleached eyeball , the scar , and the familiar weariness of his expression were still the same . 
He was wearing the white Horse Guard 's cap and a military overcoat with a whip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap . 
He sat heavily and swayed limply on his brisk little horse . 
`` Whew ... whew ... whew ! '' 
he whistled just audibly as he rode into the yard . 
His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a man who means to rest after a ceremony . 
He drew his left foot out of the stirrup and , lurching with his whole body and puckering his face with the effort , raised it with difficulty onto the saddle , leaned on his knee , groaned , and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacks and adjutants who stood ready to assist him . 
He pulled himself together , looked round , screwing up his eyes , glanced at Prince Andrew , and , evidently not recognizing him , moved with his waddling gait to the porch . 
`` Whew ... whew ... whew ! '' 
he whistled , and again glanced at Prince Andrew . 
As often occurs with old men , it was only after some seconds that the impression produced by Prince Andrew 's face linked itself up with Kutuzov 's remembrance of his personality . 
`` Ah , how do you do , my dear prince ? 
How do you do , my dear boy ? 
Come along ... '' said he , glancing wearily round , and he stepped onto the porch which creaked under his weight . 
He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch . 
`` And how 's your father ? '' 
`` I received news of his death , yesterday , '' replied Prince Andrew abruptly . 
Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and then took off his cap and crossed himself : `` May the kingdom of Heaven be his ! 
God 's will be done to us all ! '' 
He sighed deeply , his whole chest heaving , and was silent for a while . 
`` I loved him and respected him , and sympathize with you with all my heart . '' 
He embraced Prince Andrew , pressing him to his fat breast , and for some time did not let him go . 
When he released him Prince Andrew saw that Kutuzov 's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in his eyes . 
He sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raise himself . 
`` Come ! 
Come with me , we 'll have a talk , '' said he . 
But at that moment Denisov , no more intimidated by his superiors than by the enemy , came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch , despite the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him . 
Kutuzov , his hands still pressed on the seat , glanced at him glumly . 
Denisov , having given his name , announced that he had to communicate to his Serene Highness a matter of great importance for their country 's welfare . 
Kutuzov looked wearily at him and , lifting his hands with a gesture of annoyance , folded them across his stomach , repeating the words : `` For our country 's welfare ? 
Well , what is it ? 
Speak ! '' 
Denisov blushed like a girl -LRB- it was strange to see the color rise in that shaggy , bibulous , time-worn face -RRB- and boldly began to expound his plan of cutting the enemy 's lines of communication between Smolensk and Vyazma . 
Denisov came from those parts and knew the country well . 
His plan seemed decidedly a good one , especially from the strength of conviction with which he spoke . 
Kutuzov looked down at his own legs , occasionally glancing at the door of the adjoining hut as if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from it . 
And from that hut , while Denisov was speaking , a general with a portfolio under his arm really did appear . 
`` What ? '' 
said Kutuzov , in the midst of Denisov 's explanations , `` are you ready so soon ? '' 
`` Ready , your Serene Highness , '' replied the general . 
Kutuzov swayed his head , as much as to say : `` How is one man to deal with it all ? '' 
and again listened to Denisov . 
`` I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer , '' said Denisov , `` that I can bweak Napoleon 's line of communication ! '' 
`` What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevich Denisov ? '' 
asked Kutuzov , interrupting him . 
`` He is my uncle , your Sewene Highness . '' 
`` Ah , we were friends , '' said Kutuzov cheerfully . 
`` All right , all right , friend , stay here at the staff and tomorrow we 'll have a talk . '' 
With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for the papers Konovnitsyn had brought him . 
`` Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside ? '' 
said the general on duty in a discontented voice , `` the plans must be examined and several papers have to be signed . '' 
An adjutant came out and announced that everything was in readiness within . 
But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter that room till he was disengaged . 
He made a grimace ... `` No , tell them to bring a small table out here , my dear boy . 
I 'll look at them here , '' said he . 
`` Do n't go away , '' he added , turning to Prince Andrew , who remained in the porch and listened to the general 's report . 
While this was being given , Prince Andrew heard the whisper of a woman 's voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door . 
Several times on glancing that way he noticed behind that door a plump , rosy , handsome woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchief on her head , holding a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of the commander in chief . 
Kutuzov 's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrew that this was the wife of the priest whose home it was , and that she intended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt . 
`` Her husband has welcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church , and she intends to welcome him in the house ... . 
She 's very pretty , '' added the adjutant with a smile . 
At those words Kutuzov looked round . 
He was listening to the general 's report -- which consisted chiefly of a criticism of the position at Tsarevo-Zaymishche -- as he had listened to Denisov , and seven years previously had listened to the discussion at the Austerlitz council of war . 
He evidently listened only because he had ears which , though there was a piece of tow in one of them , could not help hearing ; but it was evident that nothing the general could say would surprise or even interest him , that he knew all that would be said beforehand , and heard it all only because he had to , as one has to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer . 
All that Denisov had said was clever and to the point . 
What the general was saying was even more clever and to the point , but it was evident that Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness , and knew of something else that would decide the matter -- something independent of cleverness and knowledge . 
Prince Andrew watched the commander in chief 's face attentively , and the only expression he could see there was one of boredom , curiosity as to the meaning of the feminine whispering behind the door , and a desire to observe propriety . 
It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness and learning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov , but despised them not because of his own intellect , feelings , or knowledge -- he did not try to display any of these -- but because of something else . 
He despised them because of his old age and experience of life . 
The only instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that report referred to looting by the Russian troops . 
At the end of the report the general put before him for signature a paper relating to the recovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down by the soldiers , when landowners lodged petitions for compensation . 
After hearing the matter , Kutuzov smacked his lips together and shook his head . 
`` Into the stove ... into the fire with it ! 
I tell you once for all , my dear fellow , '' said he , `` into the fire with all such things ! 
Let them cut the crops and burn wood to their hearts ' content . 
I do n't order it or allow it , but I do n't exact compensation either . 
One ca n't get on without it . 
` When wood is chopped the chips will fly . ' '' 
He looked at the paper again . 
`` Oh , this German precision ! '' 
he muttered , shaking his head . 
`` Well , that 's all ! '' 
