But the roll of the drums did not make the looting soldiers run in the direction of the drum as formerly , but made them , on the contrary , run farther away . 
Among the soldiers in the shops and passages some men were to be seen in gray coats , with closely shaven heads . 
Two officers , one with a scarf over his uniform and mounted on a lean , dark-gray horse , the other in an overcoat and on foot , stood at the corner of Ilyinka Street , talking . 
A third officer galloped up to them . 
`` The general orders them all to be driven out at once , without fail . 
This is outrageous ! 
Half the men have dispersed . '' 
`` Where are you off to ? 
... Where ? 
... '' he shouted to three infantrymen without muskets who , holding up the skirts of their overcoats , were slipping past him into the Bazaar passage . 
`` Stop , you rascals ! '' 
`` But how are you going to stop them ? '' 
replied another officer . 
`` There is no getting them together . 
The army should push on before the rest bolt , that 's all ! '' 
`` How can one push on ? 
They are stuck there , wedged on the bridge , and do n't move . 
Should n't we put a cordon round to prevent the rest from running away ? '' 
`` Come , go in there and drive them out ! '' 
shouted the senior officer . 
The officer in the scarf dismounted , called up a drummer , and went with him into the arcade . 
Some soldiers started running away in a group . 
A shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose , and a calm , persistent , calculating expression on his plump face , hurriedly and ostentatiously approached the officer , swinging his arms . 
`` Your honor ! '' 
said he . 
`` Be so good as to protect us ! 
We wo n't grudge trifles , you are welcome to anything -- we shall be delighted ! 
Pray ! 
... I 'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorable gentleman , or even two pieces with pleasure . 
For we feel how it is ; but what 's all this -- sheer robbery ! 
If you please , could not guards be placed if only to let us close the shop ... '' Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer . 
`` Eh , what twaddle ! '' 
said one of them , a thin , stern-looking man . 
`` When one 's head is gone one does n't weep for one 's hair ! 
Take what any of you like ! '' 
And flourishing his arm energetically he turned sideways to the officer . 
`` It 's all very well for you , Ivan Sidorych , to talk , '' said the first tradesman angrily . 
`` Please step inside , your honor ! '' 
`` Talk indeed ! '' 
cried the thin one . 
`` In my three shops here I have a hundred thousand rubles ' worth of goods . 
Can they be saved when the army has gone ? 
Eh , what people ! 
` Against God 's might our hands ca n't fight . ' '' 
`` Come inside , your honor ! '' 
repeated the tradesman , bowing . 
The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision . 
`` It 's not my business ! '' 
he exclaimed , and strode on quickly down one of the passages . 
From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation , and just as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shaven head was flung out violently . 
This man , bent double , rushed past the tradesman and the officer . 
The officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops , but at that moment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on the Moskva bridge and the officer ran out into the square . 
`` What is it ? 
What is it ? '' 
he asked , but his comrade was already galloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from which the screams came . 
The officer mounted his horse and rode after him . 
When he reached the bridge he saw two unlimbered guns , the infantry crossing the bridge , several overturned carts , and frightened and laughing faces among the troops . 
Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which two horses were harnessed . 
Four borzois with collars were pressing close to the wheels . 
The cart was loaded high , and at the very top , beside a child 's chair with its legs in the air , sat a peasant woman uttering piercing and desperate shrieks . 
He was told by his fellow officers that the screams of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due to the fact that General Ermolov , coming up to the crowd and learning that soldiers were dispersing among the shops while crowds of civilians blocked the bridge , had ordered two guns to be unlimbered and made a show of firing at the bridge . 
The crowd , crushing one another , upsetting carts , and shouting and squeezing desperately , had cleared off the bridge and the troops were now moving forward . 
Meanwhile , the city itself was deserted . 
There was hardly anyone in the streets . 
The gates and shops were all closed , only here and there round the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could be heard . 
Nobody drove through the streets and footsteps were rarely heard . 
The Povarskaya was quite still and deserted . 
The huge courtyard of the Rostovs ' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dung from the horses , and not a soul was to be seen there . 
In the great drawing room of the house , which had been left with all it contained , were two people . 
They were the yard porter Ignat , and the page boy Mishka , Vasilich 's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with his grandfather . 
Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming on it with one finger . 
The yard porter , his arms akimbo , stood smiling with satisfaction before the large mirror . 
`` Is n't it fine , eh , Uncle Ignat ? '' 
said the boy , suddenly beginning to strike the keyboard with both hands . 
`` Only fancy ! '' 
answered Ignat , surprised at the broadening grin on his face in the mirror . 
`` Impudence ! 
Impudence ! '' 
they heard behind them the voice of Mavra Kuzminichna who had entered silently . 
`` How he 's grinning , the fat mug ! 
Is that what you 're here for ? 
Nothing 's cleared away down there and Vasilich is worn out . 
Just you wait a bit ! '' 
Ignat left off smiling , adjusted his belt , and went out of the room with meekly downcast eyes . 
`` Aunt , I did it gently , '' said the boy . 
`` I 'll give you something gently , you monkey you ! '' 
cried Mavra Kuzminichna , raising her arm threateningly . 
`` Go and get the samovar to boil for your grandfather . '' 
Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it , and with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door . 
Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should go next -- to drink tea in the servants ' wing with Vasilich , or into the storeroom to put away what still lay about . 
She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street . 
Someone stopped at the gate , and the latch rattled as someone tried to open it . 
Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate . 
`` Who do you want ? '' 
`` The count -- Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov . '' 
`` And who are you ? '' 
`` An officer , I have to see him , '' came the reply in a pleasant , well-bred Russian voice . 
Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen , with the round face of a Rostov , entered the yard . 
`` They have gone away , sir . 
Went away yesterday at vespertime , '' said Mavra Kuzminichna cordially . 
