Behave as if you know nothing either , '' she said . 
`` And I will go and tell her it is no use expecting him ! 
And stay to dinner if you care to ! '' 
she called after Pierre . 
Pierre met the old count , who seemed nervous and upset . 
That morning Natasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski . 
`` Troubles , troubles , my dear fellow ! '' 
he said to Pierre . 
`` What troubles one has with these girls without their mother ! 
I do so regret having come here ... . 
I will be frank with you . 
Have you heard she has broken off her engagement without consulting anybody ? 
It 's true this engagement never was much to my liking . 
Of course he is an excellent man , but still , with his father 's disapproval they would n't have been happy , and Natasha wo n't lack suitors . 
Still , it has been going on so long , and to take such a step without father 's or mother 's consent ! 
And now she 's ill , and God knows what ! 
It 's hard , Count , hard to manage daughters in their mother 's absence ... '' Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change the subject , but the count returned to his troubles . 
Sonya entered the room with an agitated face . 
`` Natasha is not quite well ; she 's in her room and would like to see you . 
Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come . '' 
`` Yes , you are a great friend of Bolkonski 's , no doubt she wants to send him a message , '' said the count . 
`` Oh dear ! 
Oh dear ! 
How happy it all was ! '' 
And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left the room . 
When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married , Natasha did not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed by Pierre himself . 
Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along the corridor to Natasha 's room . 
Natasha , pale and stern , was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna , and her eyes , glittering feverishly , met Pierre with a questioning look the moment he entered . 
She did not smile or nod , but only gazed fixedly at him , and her look asked only one thing : was he a friend , or like the others an enemy in regard to Anatole ? 
As for Pierre , he evidently did not exist for her . 
`` He knows all about it , '' said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierre and addressing Natasha . 
`` Let him tell you whether I have told the truth . '' 
Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and wounded animal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen . 
`` Natalya Ilynichna , '' Pierre began , dropping his eyes with a feeling of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do , `` whether it is true or not should make no difference to you , because ... '' `` Then it is not true that he 's married ! '' 
`` Yes , it is true . '' 
`` Has he been married long ? '' 
she asked . 
`` On your honor ? 
... '' Pierre gave his word of honor . 
`` Is he still here ? '' 
she asked , quickly . 
`` Yes , I have just seen him . '' 
She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her hands that they should leave her alone . 
Pierre did not stay for dinner , but left the room and went away at once . 
He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin , at the thought of whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt a difficulty in breathing . 
He was not at the ice hills , nor at the gypsies ' , nor at Komoneno 's . 
Pierre drove to the Club . 
In the Club all was going on as usual . 
The members who were assembling for dinner were sitting about in groups ; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the town news . 
The footman having greeted him , knowing his habits and his acquaintances , told him there was a place left for him in the small dining room and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the library , but Paul Timofeevich had not yet arrived . 
One of Pierre 's acquaintances , while they were talking about the weather , asked if he had heard of Kuragin 's abduction of Rostova which was talked of in the town , and was it true ? 
Pierre laughed and said it was nonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs ' . 
He asked everyone about Anatole . 
One man told him he had not come yet , and another that he was coming to dinner . 
Pierre felt it strange to see this calm , indifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in his soul . 
He paced through the ballroom , waited till everyone had come , and as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but drove home . 
Anatole , for whom Pierre was looking , dined that day with Dolokhov , consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunate affair . 
It seemed to him essential to see Natasha . 
In the evening he drove to his sister 's to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting . 
When Pierre returned home after vainly hunting all over Moscow , his valet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the countess . 
The countess ' drawing room was full of guests . 
Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since his return -- at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever - entered the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him . 
`` Ah , Pierre , '' said the countess going up to her husband . 
`` You do n't know what a plight our Anatole ... '' She stopped , seeing in the forward thrust of her husband 's head , in his glowing eyes and his resolute gait , the terrible indications of that rage and strength which she knew and had herself experienced after his duel with Dolokhov . 
`` Where you are , there is vice and evil ! '' 
said Pierre to his wife . 
`` Anatole , come with me ! 
I must speak to you , '' he added in French . 
Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively , ready to follow Pierre . 
Pierre , taking him by the arm , pulled him toward himself and was leading him from the room . 
`` If you allow yourself in my drawing room ... '' whispered Helene , but Pierre did not reply and went out of the room . 
Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his face betrayed anxiety . 
Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressed Anatole without looking at him . 
`` You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about to elope with her , is that so ? '' 
`` Mon cher , '' answered Anatole -LRB- their whole conversation was in French -RRB- , `` I do n't consider myself bound to answer questions put to me in that tone . '' 
Pierre 's face , already pale , became distorted by fury . 
He seized Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook him from side to side till Anatole 's face showed a sufficient degree of terror . 
`` When I tell you that I must talk to you ! 
... '' repeated Pierre . 
`` Come now , this is stupid . 
What ? '' 
said Anatole , fingering a button of his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth . 
`` You 're a scoundrel and a blackguard , and I do n't know what deprives me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this ! '' 
said Pierre , expressing himself so artificially because he was talking French . 
He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly , but at once put it back in its place . 
`` Did you promise to marry her ? '' 
`` I. . . 
I did n't think of it . 
I never promised , because ... '' Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Have you any letters of hers ? 
Any letters ? '' 
he said , moving toward Anatole . 
Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into his pocket and drew out his pocketbook . 
Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and , pushing aside a table that stood in his way , threw himself on the sofa . 
`` I sha n't be violent , do n't be afraid ! '' 
said Pierre in answer to a frightened gesture of Anatole 's . 
`` First , the letters , '' said he , as if repeating a lesson to himself . 
`` Secondly , '' he continued after a short pause , again rising and again pacing the room , `` tomorrow you must get out of Moscow . '' 
`` But how can I ? 
... '' `` Thirdly , '' Pierre continued without listening to him , `` you must never breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countess Rostova . 
