In that case the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack . 
If they attack our center we , having the center battery on this high ground , shall withdraw the left flank under its cover , and retreat to the dip by echelons . '' 
So he reasoned ... . 
All the time he had been beside the gun , he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly , but as often happens had not understood a word of what they were saying . 
Suddenly , however , he was struck by a voice coming from the shed , and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen . 
`` No , friend , '' said a pleasant and , as it seemed to Prince Andrew , a familiar voice , `` what I say is that if it were possible to know what is beyond death , none of us would be afraid of it . 
That 's so , friend . '' 
Another , a younger voice , interrupted him : `` Afraid or not , you ca n't escape it anyhow . '' 
`` All the same , one is afraid ! 
Oh , you clever people , '' said a third manly voice interrupting them both . 
`` Of course you artillery men are very wise , because you can take everything along with you -- vodka and snacks . '' 
And the owner of the manly voice , evidently an infantry officer , laughed . 
`` Yes , one is afraid , '' continued the first speaker , he of the familiar voice . 
`` One is afraid of the unknown , that 's what it is . 
Whatever we may say about the soul going to the sky ... we know there is no sky but only an atmosphere . '' 
The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer . 
`` Well , stand us some of your herb vodka , Tushin , '' it said . 
`` Why , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` that 's the captain who stood up in the sutler 's hut without his boots . '' 
He recognized the agreeable , philosophizing voice with pleasure . 
`` Some herb vodka ? 
Certainly ! '' 
said Tushin . 
`` But still , to conceive a future life ... '' He did not finish . 
Just then there was a whistle in the air ; nearer and nearer , faster and louder , louder and faster , a cannon ball , as if it had not finished saying what was necessary , thudded into the ground near the shed with super human force , throwing up a mass of earth . 
The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact . 
And immediately Tushin , with a short pipe in the corner of his mouth and his kind , intelligent face rather pale , rushed out of the shed followed by the owner of the manly voice , a dashing infantry officer who hurried off to his company , buttoning up his coat as he ran . 
Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery , looking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball . 
His eyes ran rapidly over the wide space , but he only saw that the hitherto motionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was a battery to their left . 
The smoke above it had not yet dispersed . 
Two mounted Frenchmen , probably adjutants , were galloping up the hill . 
A small but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill , probably to strengthen the front line . 
The smoke of the first shot had not yet dispersed before another puff appeared , followed by a report . 
The battle had begun ! 
Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back to Grunth to find Prince Bagration . 
He heard the cannonade behind him growing louder and more frequent . 
Evidently our guns had begun to reply . 
From the bottom of the slope , where the parleys had taken place , came the report of musketry . 
Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte 's stern letter , and Murat , humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault , had at once moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both the Russian wings , hoping before evening and before the arrival of the Emperor to crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him . 
`` It has begun . 
Here it is ! '' 
thought Prince Andrew , feeling the blood rush to his heart . 
`` But where and how will my Toulon present itself ? '' 
Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge and drinking vodka a quarter of an hour before , he saw everywhere the same rapid movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their muskets ready , and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness that filled his heart . 
`` It has begun ! 
Here it is , dreadful but enjoyable ! '' 
was what the face of each soldier and each officer seemed to say . 
Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up , he saw , in the light of the dull autumn evening , mounted men coming toward him . 
The foremost , wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap and riding a white horse , was Prince Bagration . 
Prince Andrew stopped , waiting for him to come up ; Prince Bagration reined in his horse and recognizing Prince Andrew nodded to him . 
He still looked ahead while Prince Andrew told him what he had seen . 
The feeling , `` It has begun ! 
Here it is ! '' 
was seen even on Prince Bagration 's hard brown face with its half-closed , dull , sleepy eyes . 
Prince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive face and wished he could tell what , if anything , this man was thinking and feeling at that moment . 
`` Is there anything at all behind that impassive face ? '' 
Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked . 
Prince Bagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrew told him , and said , `` Very good ! '' 
in a tone that seemed to imply that everything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what he had foreseen . 
Prince Andrew , out of breath with his rapid ride , spoke quickly . 
Prince Bagration , uttering his words with an Oriental accent , spoke particularly slowly , as if to impress the fact that there was no need to hurry . 
However , he put his horse to a trot in the direction of Tushin 's battery . 
Prince Andrew followed with the suite . 
Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite , the prince 's personal adjutant , Zherkov , an orderly officer , the staff officer on duty , riding a fine bobtailed horse , and a civilian -- an accountant who had asked permission to be present at the battle out of curiosity . 
The accountant , a stout , full-faced man , looked around him with a naive smile of satisfaction and presented a strange appearance among the hussars , Cossacks , and adjutants , in his camlet coat , as he jolted on his horse with a convoy officer 's saddle . 
`` He wants to see a battle , '' said Zherkov to Bolkonski , pointing to the accountant , `` but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomach already . '' 
`` Oh , leave off ! '' 
said the accountant with a beaming but rather cunning smile , as if flattered at being made the subject of Zherkov 's joke , and purposely trying to appear stupider than he really was . 
`` It is very strange , mon Monsieur Prince , '' said the staff officer . 
-LRB- He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing a prince , but could not get it quite right . -RRB- 
By this time they were all approaching Tushin 's battery , and a ball struck the ground in front of them . 
`` What 's that that has fallen ? '' 
asked the accountant with a naive smile . 
`` A French pancake , '' answered Zherkov . 
`` So that 's what they hit with ? '' 
asked the accountant . 
`` How awful ! '' 
He seemed to swell with satisfaction . 
He had hardly finished speaking when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling which suddenly ended with a thud into something soft ... f-f-flop ! 
and a Cossack , riding a little to their right and behind the accountant , crashed to earth with his horse . 
Zherkov and the staff officer bent over their saddles and turned their horses away . 
The accountant stopped , facing the Cossack , and examined him with attentive curiosity . 
The Cossack was dead , but the horse still struggled . 
Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes , looked round , and , seeing the cause of the confusion , turned away with indifference , as if to say , `` Is it worth while noticing trifles ? '' 
He reined in his horse with the case of a skillful rider and , slightly bending over , disengaged his saber which had caught in his cloak . 
It was an old-fashioned saber of a kind no longer in general use . 
Prince Andrew remembered the story of Suvorov giving his saber to Bagration in Italy , and the recollection was particularly pleasant at that moment . 
They had reached the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examined the battlefield . 
`` Whose company ? '' 
asked Prince Bagration of an artilleryman standing by the ammunition wagon . 
He asked , `` Whose company ? '' 
but he really meant , `` Are you frightened here ? '' 
and the artilleryman understood him . 
`` Captain Tushin 's , your excellency ! '' 
shouted the red-haired , freckled gunner in a merry voice , standing to attention . 
`` Yes , yes , '' muttered Bagration as if considering something , and he rode past the limbers to the farthest cannon . 
As he approached , a ringing shot issued from it deafening him and his suite , and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun they could see the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quickly back to its former position . 
A huge , broad-shouldered gunner , Number One , holding a mop , his legs far apart , sprang to the wheel ; while Number Two with a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon 's mouth . 
The short , round-shouldered Captain Tushin , stumbling over the tail of the gun carriage , moved forward and , not noticing the general , looked out shading his eyes with his small hand . 
`` Lift it two lines more and it will be just right , '' cried he in a feeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note , ill suited to his weak figure . 
`` Number Two ! '' 
