The commencement of that movement was the movement from west to east . 
For the peoples of the west to be able to make their warlike movement to Moscow it was necessary : -LRB- 1 -RRB- that they should form themselves into a military group of a size able to endure a collision with the warlike military group of the east , -LRB- 2 -RRB- that they should abandon all established traditions and customs , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- that during their military movement they should have at their head a man who could justify to himself and to them the deceptions , robberies , and murders which would have to be committed during that movement . 
And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequately large group was destroyed , as well as the old habits and traditions , and step by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with new customs and traditions , and a man was produced who would stand at the head of the coming movement and bear the responsibility for all that had to be done . 
A man without convictions , without habits , without traditions , without a name , and not even a Frenchman , emerges -- by what seem the strangest chances -- from among all the seething French parties , and without joining any one of them is borne forward to a prominent position . 
The ignorance of his colleagues , the weakness and insignificance of his opponents , the frankness of his falsehoods , and the dazzling and self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head of the army . 
The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sent to Italy , his opponents ' reluctance to fight , and his own childish audacity and self-confidence secure him military fame . 
Innumerable so called chances accompany him everywhere . 
The disfavor into which he falls with the rulers of France turns to his advantage . 
His attempts to avoid his predestined path are unsuccessful : he is not received into the Russian service , and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comes to nothing . 
During the war in Italy he is several times on the verge of destruction and each time is saved in an unexpected manner . 
Owing to various diplomatic considerations the Russian armies -- just those which might have destroyed his prestige -- do not appear upon the scene till he is no longer there . 
On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in a process of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitably wiped out and destroyed . 
And by chance an escape from this dangerous position presents itself in the form of an aimless and senseless expedition to Africa . 
Again so-called chance accompanies him . 
Impregnable Malta surrenders without a shot ; his most reckless schemes are crowned with success . 
The enemy 's fleet , which subsequently did not let a single boat pass , allows his entire army to elude it . 
In Africa a whole series of outrages are committed against the almost unarmed inhabitants . 
And the men who commit these crimes , especially their leader , assure themselves that this is admirable , this is glory - it resembles Caesar and Alexander the Great and is therefore good . 
This ideal of glory and grandeur -- which consists not merely in considering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself on every crime one commits , ascribing to it an incomprehensible supernatural significance -- that ideal , destined to guide this man and his associates , had scope for its development in Africa . 
Whatever he does succeeds . 
The plague does not touch him . 
The cruelty of murdering prisoners is not imputed to him as a fault . 
His childishly rash , uncalled-for , and ignoble departure from Africa , leaving his comrades in distress , is set down to his credit , and again the enemy 's fleet twice lets him slip past . 
When , intoxicated by the crimes he has committed so successfully , he reaches Paris , the dissolution of the republican government , which a year earlier might have ruined him , has reached its extreme limit , and his presence there now as a newcomer free from party entanglements can only serve to exalt him -- and though he himself has no plan , he is quite ready for his new role . 
He had no plan , he was afraid of everything , but the parties snatched at him and demanded his participation . 
He alone -- with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italy and Egypt , his insane self-adulation , his boldness in crime and frankness in lying -- he alone could justify what had to be done . 
He is needed for the place that awaits him , and so almost apart from his will and despite his indecision , his lack of a plan , and all his mistakes , he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power and the conspiracy is crowned with success . 
He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature . 
In alarm he wishes to flee , considering himself lost . 
He pretends to fall into a swoon and says senseless things that should have ruined him . 
But the once proud and shrewd rulers of France , feeling that their part is played out , are even more bewildered than he , and do not say the words they should have said to destroy him and retain their power . 
Chance , millions of chances , give him power , and all men as if by agreement co-operate to confirm that power . 
Chance forms the characters of the rulers of France , who submit to him ; chance forms the character of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government ; chance contrives a plot against him which not only fails to harm him but confirms his power . 
Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands and unexpectedly causes him to kill him -- thereby convincing the mob more forcibly than in any other way that he had the right , since he had the might . 
Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts to prepare an expedition against England -LRB- which would inevitably have ruined him -RRB- he never carries out that intention , but unexpectedly falls upon Mack and the Austrians , who surrender without a battle . 
Chance and genius give him the victory at Austerlitz ; and by chance all men , not only the French but all Europe -- except England which does not take part in the events about to happen -- despite their former horror and detestation of his crimes , now recognize his authority , the title he has given himself , and his ideal of grandeur and glory , which seems excellent and reasonable to them all . 
As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement , the western forces push toward the east several times in 1805 , 1806 , 1807 , and 1809 , gaining strength and growing . 
In 1811 the group of people that had formed in France unites into one group with the peoples of Central Europe . 
The strength of the justification of the man who stands at the head of the movement grows with the increased size of the group . 
During the ten-year preparatory period this man had formed relations with all the crowned heads of Europe . 
The discredited rulers of the world can oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensate Napoleonic ideal of glory and grandeur . 
One after another they hasten to display their insignificance before him . 
The King of Prussia sends his wife to seek the great man 's mercy ; the Emperor of Austria considers it a favor that this man receives a daughter the Caesars into his bed ; the Pope , the guardian of all that the nations hold sacred , utilizes religion for the aggrandizement of the great man . 
It is not Napoleon who prepares himself for the accomplishment of his role , so much as all those round him who prepare him to take on himself the whole responsibility for what is happening and has to happen . 
There is no step , no crime or petty fraud he commits , which in the mouths of those around him is not at once represented as a great deed . 
The most suitable fete the Germans can devise for him is a celebration of Jena and Auerstadt . 
Not only is he great , but so are his ancestors , his brothers , his stepsons , and his brothers-in-law . 
Everything is done to deprive him of the remains of his reason and to prepare him for his terrible part . 
And when he is ready so too are the forces . 
The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal -- Moscow . 
That city is taken ; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than the opposing armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz to Wagram . 
But suddenly instead of those chances and that genius which hitherto had so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series of successes to the predestined goal , an innumerable sequence of inverse chances occur -- from the cold in his head at Borodino to the sparks which set Moscow on fire , and the frosts -- and instead of genius , stupidity and immeasurable baseness become evident . 
The invaders flee , turn back , flee again , and all the chances are now not for Napoleon but always against him . 
A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with a remarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east . 
Attempted drives from east to west -- similar to the contrary movements of 1805 , 1807 , and 1809 -- precede the great westward movement ; there is the same coalescence into a group of enormous dimensions ; the same adhesion of the people of Central Europe to the movement ; the same hesitation midway , and the same increasing rapidity as the goal is approached . 
Paris , the ultimate goal , is reached . 
The Napoleonic government and army are destroyed . 
Napoleon himself is no longer of any account ; all his actions are evidently pitiful and mean , but again an inexplicable chance occurs . 
The allies detest Napoleon whom they regard as the cause of their sufferings . 
Deprived of power and authority , his crimes and his craft exposed , he should have appeared to them what he appeared ten years previously and one year later -- an outlawed brigand . 
But by some strange chance no one perceives this . 
His part is not yet ended . 
The man who ten years before and a year later was considered an outlawed brigand is sent to an island two days ' sail from France , which for some reason is presented to him as his dominion , and guards are given to him and millions of money are paid him . 
The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels . 
The waves of the great movement abate , and on the calm surface eddies are formed in which float the diplomatists , who imagine that they have caused the floods to abate . 
But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed . 
The diplomatists think that their disagreements are the cause of this fresh pressure of natural forces ; they anticipate war between their sovereigns ; the position seems to them insoluble . 
But the wave they feel to be rising does not come from the quarter they expect . 
It rises again from the same point as before -- Paris . 
The last backwash of the movement from the west occurs : a backwash which serves to solve the apparently insuperable diplomatic difficulties and ends the military movement of that period of history . 
The man who had devastated France returns to France alone , without any conspiracy and without soldiers . 
Any guard might arrest him , but by strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the man they cursed the day before and will curse again a month later . 
This man is still needed to justify the final collective act . 
That act is performed . 
The last role is played . 
The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash off his powder and paint : he will not be wanted any more . 
And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy to himself in solitude on his island , justifying his actions by intrigues and lies when the justification is no longer needed , and displaying to the whole world what it was that people had mistaken for strength as long as an unseen hand directed his actions . 
The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped the actor shows him to us . 
`` See what you believed in ! 
This is he ! 
Do you now see that it was not he but I who moved you ? '' 
But dazed by the force of the movement , it was long before people understood this . 
Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life of Alexander I , the man who stood at the head of the countermovement from east to west . 
What was needed for him who , overshadowing others , stood at the head of that movement from east to west ? 
What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy with European affairs , but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests ; a moral superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operated with him ; a mild and attractive personality ; and a personal grievance against Napoleon . 
And all this was found in Alexander I ; all this had been prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life : his education , his early liberalism , the advisers who surrounded him , and by Austerlitz , and Tilsit , and Erfurt . 
During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed . 
But as soon as the necessity for a general European war presented itself he appeared in his place at the given moment and , uniting the nations of Europe , led them to the goal . 
The goal is reached . 
After the final war of 1815 Alexander possesses all possible power . 
How does he use it ? 
Alexander I -- the pacifier of Europe , the man who from his early years had striven only for his people 's welfare , the originator of the liberal innovations in his fatherland -- now that he seemed to possess the utmost power and therefore to have the possibility of bringing about the welfare of his peoples -- at the time when Napoleon in exile was drawing up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have made mankind happy had he retained power -- Alexander I , having fulfilled his mission and feeling the hand of God upon him , suddenly recognizes the insignificance of that supposed power , turns away from it , and gives it into the hands of contemptible men whom he despises , saying only : `` Not unto us , not unto us , but unto Thy Name ! 
... I too am a man like the rest of you . 
Let me live like a man and think of my soul and of God . '' 
As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself , and yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man to comprehend , so each individual has within himself his own aims and yet has them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man . 
A bee settling on a flower has stung a child . 
And the child is afraid of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people . 
A poet admires the bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says it exists to suck the fragrance of flowers . 
A beekeeper , seeing the bee collect pollen from flowers and carry it to the hive , says that it exists to gather honey . 
Another beekeeper who has studied the life of the hive more closely says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feed the young bees and rear a queen , and that it exists to perpetuate its race . 
