`` Oh , go to the devil ! '' 
called out a voice , drowned by the laughter of the orderlies and servants . 
`` All the same , I love and value nothing but triumph over them all , I value this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me in this mist ! '' 
That same night , Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty in front of Bagration 's detachment . 
His hussars were placed along the line in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to master the sleepiness that kept coming over him . 
An enormous space , with our army 's campfires dimly glowing in the fog , could be seen behind him ; in front of him was misty darkness . 
Rostov could see nothing , peer as he would into that foggy distance : now something gleamed gray , now there was something black , now little lights seemed to glimmer where the enemy ought to be , now he fancied it was only something in his own eyes . 
His eyes kept closing , and in his fancy appeared -- now the Emperor , now Denisov , and now Moscow memories -- and he again hurriedly opened his eyes and saw close before him the head and ears of the horse he was riding , and sometimes , when he came within six paces of them , the black figures of hussars , but in the distance was still the same misty darkness . 
`` Why not ? 
... It might easily happen , '' thought Rostov , `` that the Emperor will meet me and give me an order as he would to any other officer ; he 'll say : ` Go and find out what 's there . ' 
There are many stories of his getting to know an officer in just such a chance way and attaching him to himself ! 
What if he gave me a place near him ? 
Oh , how I would guard him , how I would tell him the truth , how I would unmask his deceivers ! '' 
And in order to realize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign , Rostov pictured to himself an enemy or a deceitful German , whom he would not only kill with pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before the Emperor . 
Suddenly a distant shout aroused him . 
He started and opened his eyes . 
`` Where am I ? 
Oh yes , in the skirmishing line ... pass and watchword -- shaft , Olmutz . 
What a nuisance that our squadron will be in reserve tomorrow , '' he thought . 
`` I 'll ask leave to go to the front , this may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor . 
It wo n't be long now before I am off duty . 
I 'll take another turn and when I get back I 'll go to the general and ask him . '' 
He readjusted himself in the saddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars . 
It seemed to him that it was getting lighter . 
To the left he saw a sloping descent lit up , and facing it a black knoll that seemed as steep as a wall . 
On this knoll there was a white patch that Rostov could not at all make out : was it a glade in the wood lit up by the moon , or some unmelted snow , or some white houses ? 
He even thought something moved on that white spot . 
`` I expect it 's snow ... that spot ... a spot -- une tache , '' he thought . 
`` There now ... it 's not a tache ... Natasha ... sister , black eyes ... Na ... tasha ... -LRB- Wo n't she be surprised when I tell her how I 've seen the Emperor ? -RRB- 
Natasha ... take my sabretache ... '' -- `` Keep to the right , your honor , there are bushes here , '' came the voice of an hussar , past whom Rostov was riding in the act of falling asleep . 
Rostov lifted his head that had sunk almost to his horse 's mane and pulled up beside the hussar . 
He was succumbing to irresistible , youthful , childish drowsiness . 
`` But what was I thinking ? 
I must n't forget . 
How shall I speak to the Emperor ? 
No , that 's not it -- that 's tomorrow . 
Oh yes ! 
Natasha ... sabretache ... saber them ... Whom ? 
The hussars ... Ah , the hussars with mustaches . 
Along the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with mustaches ... I thought about him too , just opposite Guryev 's house ... Old Guryev ... . 
Oh , but Denisov 's a fine fellow . 
But that 's all nonsense . 
The chief thing is that the Emperor is here . 
How he looked at me and wished to say something , but dared not ... . 
No , it was I who dared not . 
But that 's nonsense , the chief thing is not to forget the important thing I was thinking of . 
Yes , Na-tasha , sabretache , oh , yes , yes ! 
That 's right ! '' 
And his head once more sank to his horse 's neck . 
All at once it seemed to him that he was being fired at . 
`` What ? 
What ? 
What ? 
... Cut them down ! 
What ? 
... '' said Rostov , waking up . 
At the moment he opened his eyes he heard in front of him , where the enemy was , the long-drawn shouts of thousands of voices . 
His horse and the horse of the hussar near him pricked their ears at these shouts . 
Over there , where the shouting came from , a fire flared up and went out again , then another , and all along the French line on the hill fires flared up and the shouting grew louder and louder . 
Rostov could hear the sound of French words but could not distinguish them . 
The din of many voices was too great ; all he could hear was : `` ahahah ! '' 
and `` rrrr ! '' 
`` What 's that ? 
What do you make of it ? '' 
said Rostov to the hussar beside him . 
`` That must be the enemy 's camp ! '' 
The hussar did not reply . 
`` Why , do n't you hear it ? '' 
Rostov asked again , after waiting for a reply . 
`` Who can tell , your honor ? '' 
replied the hussar reluctantly . 
`` From the direction , it must be the enemy , '' repeated Rostov . 
`` It may be he or it may be nothing , '' muttered the hussar . 
`` It 's dark ... Steady ! '' 
he cried to his fidgeting horse . 
Rostov 's horse was also getting restive : it pawed the frozen ground , pricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights . 
The shouting grew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an army of several thousand men could produce . 
The lights spread farther and farther , probably along the line of the French camp . 
Rostov no longer wanted to sleep . 
The gay triumphant shouting of the enemy army had a stimulating effect on him . 
`` Vive l'Empereur ! 
L'Empereur ! '' 
he now heard distinctly . 
`` They ca n't be far off , probably just beyond the stream , '' he said to the hussar beside him . 
The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily . 
The sound of horse 's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussars was heard , and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant of hussars suddenly appeared , looming huge as an elephant . 
`` Your honor , the generals ! '' 
said the sergeant , riding up to Rostov . 
Rostov , still looking round toward the fires and the shouts , rode with the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along the line . 
One was on a white horse . 
Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov with their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of the lights and shouts in the enemy 's camp . 
Rostov rode up to Bagration , reported to him , and then joined the adjutants listening to what the generals were saying . 
`` Believe me , '' said Prince Dolgorukov , addressing Bagration , `` it is nothing but a trick ! 
He has retreated and ordered the rearguard to kindle fires and make a noise to deceive us . '' 
`` Hardly , '' said Bagration . 
`` I saw them this evening on that knoll ; if they had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too ... . 
Officer ! '' 
said Bagration to Rostov , `` are the enemy 's skirmishers still there ? '' 
`` They were there this evening , but now I do n't know , your excellency . 
Shall I go with some of my hussars to see ? '' 
