`` It 's in charge of the queer fellow we saw without his boots . 
You can see everything from there ; let 's go there , Prince . '' 
`` Thank you very much , I will go on alone , '' said Prince Andrew , wishing to rid himself of this staff officer 's company , `` please do n't trouble yourself further . '' 
The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone . 
The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went , the more orderly and cheerful were the troops . 
The greatest disorder and depression had been in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim road seven miles away from the French . 
At Grunth also some apprehension and alarm could be felt , but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the French lines the more confident was the appearance of our troops . 
The soldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in lines , the sergeants major and company officers were counting the men , poking the last man in each section in the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up . 
Soldiers scattered over the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood and were building shelters with merry chatter and laughter ; around the fires sat others , dressed and undressed , drying their shirts and leg bands or mending boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers and porridge cookers . 
In one company dinner was ready , and the soldiers were gazing eagerly at the steaming boiler , waiting till the sample , which a quartermaster sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to an officer who sat on a log before his shelter , had been tasted . 
Another company , a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka , crowded round a pock-marked , broad-shouldered sergeant major who , tilting a keg , filled one after another the canteen lids held out to him . 
The soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips with reverential faces , emptied them , rolling the vodka in their mouths , and walked away from the sergeant major with brightened expressions , licking their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats . 
All their faces were as serene as if all this were happening at home awaiting peaceful encampment , and not within sight of the enemy before an action in which at least half of them would be left on the field . 
After passing a chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kiev grenadiers -- fine fellows busy with similar peaceful affairs -- near the shelter of the regimental commander , higher than and different from the others , Prince Andrew came out in front of a platoon of grenadiers before whom lay a naked man . 
Two soldiers held him while two others were flourishing their switches and striking him regularly on his bare back . 
The man shrieked unnaturally . 
A stout major was pacing up and down the line , and regardless of the screams kept repeating : `` It 's a shame for a soldier to steal ; a soldier must be honest , honorable , and brave , but if he robs his fellows there is no honor in him , he 's a scoundrel . 
Go on ! 
Go on ! '' 
So the swishing sound of the strokes , and the desperate but unnatural screams , continued . 
`` Go on , go on ! '' 
said the major . 
A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on his face stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at the adjutant as he rode by . 
Prince Andrew , having reached the front line , rode along it . 
Our front line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right and left flanks , but in the center where the men with a flag of truce had passed that morning , the lines were so near together that the men could see one another 's faces and speak to one another . 
Besides the soldiers who formed the picket line on either side , there were many curious onlookers who , jesting and laughing , stared at their strange foreign enemies . 
Since early morning -- despite an injunction not to approach the picket line -- the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away . 
The soldiers forming the picket line , like showmen exhibiting a curiosity , no longer looked at the French but paid attention to the sight-seers and grew weary waiting to be relieved . 
Prince Andrew halted to have a look at the French . 
`` Look ! 
Look there ! '' 
one soldier was saying to another , pointing to a Russian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officer and was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier . 
`` Hark to him jabbering ! 
Fine , is n't it ? 
It 's all the Frenchy can do to keep up with him . 
There now , Sidorov ! '' 
`` Wait a bit and listen . 
It 's fine ! '' 
answered Sidorov , who was considered an adept at French . 
The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov . 
Prince Andrew recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying . 
Dolokhov had come from the left flank where their regiment was stationed , with his captain . 
`` Now then , go on , go on ! '' 
incited the officer , bending forward and trying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensible to him . 
`` More , please : more ! 
What 's he saying ? '' 
Dolokhov did not answer the captain ; he had been drawn into a hot dispute with the French grenadier . 
They were naturally talking about the campaign . 
The Frenchman , confusing the Austrians with the Russians , was trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered and had fled all the way from Ulm , while Dolokhov maintained that the Russians had not surrendered but had beaten the French . 
`` We have orders to drive you off here , and we shall drive you off , '' said Dolokhov . 
`` Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured ! '' 
said the French grenadier . 
The French onlookers and listeners laughed . 
`` We 'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov ... , '' * said Dolokhov . 
* `` On vous fera danser . '' 
`` Qu ' est-ce qu'il chante ? '' 
* asked a Frenchman . 
* `` What 's he singing about ? '' 
`` It 's ancient history , '' said another , guessing that it referred to a former war . 
`` The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught the others ... '' `` Bonaparte ... '' began Dolokhov , but the Frenchman interrupted him . 
`` Not Bonaparte . 
He is the Emperor ! 
Sacre nom ... ! '' 
cried he angrily . 
`` The devil skin your Emperor . '' 
And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier 's Russian and shouldering his musket walked away . 
`` Let us go , Ivan Lukich , '' he said to the captain . 
`` Ah , that 's the way to talk French , '' said the picket soldiers . 
`` Now , Sidorov , you have a try ! '' 
Sidorov , turning to the French , winked , and began to jabber meaningless sounds very fast : `` Kari , mala , tafa , safi , muter , Kaska , '' he said , trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice . 
`` Ho ! 
ho ! 
ho ! 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
Ouh ! 
ouh ! '' 
came peals of such healthy and good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected the French involuntarily , so much so that the only thing left to do seemed to be to unload the muskets , muskets , explode the ammunition , and all return home as quickly as possible . 
But the guns remained loaded , the loopholes in blockhouses and entrenchments looked out just as menacingly , and the unlimbered cannon confronted one another as before . 
Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left , Prince Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the staff officer had told him the whole field could be seen . 
Here he dismounted , and stopped beside the farthest of the four unlimbered cannon . 
Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and down ; he stood at attention when the officer arrived , but at a sign resumed his measured , monotonous pacing . 
Behind the guns were their limbers and still farther back picket ropes and artillerymen 's bonfires . 
To the left , not far from the farthest cannon , was a small , newly constructed wattle shed from which came the sound of officers ' voices in eager conversation . 
It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position and the greater part of the enemy 's opened out from this battery . 
Just facing it , on the crest of the opposite hill , the village of Schon Grabern could be seen , and in three places to left and right the French troops amid the smoke of their campfires , the greater part of whom were evidently in the village itself and behind the hill . 
To the left from that village , amid the smoke , was something resembling a battery , but it was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye . 
Our right flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dominated the French position . 
Our infantry were stationed there , and at the farthest point the dragoons . 
In the center , where Tushin 's battery stood and from which Prince Andrew was surveying the position , was the easiest and most direct descent and ascent to the brook separating us from Schon Grabern . 
On the left our troops were close to a copse , in which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood . 
The French line was wider than ours , and it was plain that they could easily outflank us on both sides . 
Behind our position was a steep and deep dip , making it difficult for artillery and cavalry to retire . 
Prince Andrew took out his notebook and , leaning on the cannon , sketched a plan of the position . 
He made some notes on two points , intending to mention them to Bagration . 
His idea was , first , to concentrate all the artillery in the center , and secondly , to withdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip . 
Prince Andrew , being always near the commander in chief , closely following the mass movements and general orders , and constantly studying historical accounts of battles , involuntarily pictured to himself the course of events in the forthcoming action in broad outline . 
He imagined only important possibilities : `` If the enemy attacks the right flank , '' he said to himself , `` the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs must hold their position till reserves from the center come up . 
