`` I should not be doing my duty , Count , '' he said in timid tones , `` and should not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me in choosing me for your second , if at this grave , this very grave , moment I did not tell you the whole truth . 
I think there is no sufficient ground for this affair , or for blood to be shed over it ... . 
You were not right , not quite in the right , you were impetuous ... '' `` Oh yes , it is horribly stupid , '' said Pierre . 
`` Then allow me to express your regrets , and I am sure your opponent will accept them , '' said Nesvitski -LRB- who like the others concerned in the affair , and like everyone in similar cases , did not yet believe that the affair had come to an actual duel -RRB- . 
`` You know , Count , it is much more honorable to admit one 's mistake than to let matters become irreparable . 
There was no insult on either side . 
Allow me to convey ... '' `` No ! 
What is there to talk about ? '' 
said Pierre . 
`` It 's all the same ... . 
Is everything ready ? '' 
he added . 
`` Only tell me where to go and where to shoot , '' he said with an unnaturally gentle smile . 
He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working of the trigger , as he had not before held a pistol in his hand -- a fact that he did not to confess . 
`` Oh yes , like that , I know , I only forgot , '' said he . 
`` No apologies , none whatever , '' said Dolokhov to Denisov -LRB- who on his side had been attempting a reconciliation -RRB- , and he also went up to the appointed place . 
The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road , where the sleighs had been left , in a small clearing in the pine forest covered with melting snow , the frost having begun to break up during the last few days . 
The antagonists stood forty paces apart at the farther edge of the clearing . 
The seconds , measuring the paces , left tracks in the deep wet snow between the place where they had been standing and Nesvitski 's and Dolokhov 's sabers , which were stuck intothe ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier . 
It was thawing and misty ; at forty paces ' distance nothing could be seen . 
For three minutes all had been ready , but they still delayed and all were silent . 
`` Well begin ! '' 
said Dolokhov . 
`` All right , '' said Pierre , still smiling in the same way . 
A feeling of dread was in the air . 
It was evident that the affair so lightly begun could no longer be averted but was taking its course independently of men 's will . 
Denisov first went to the barrier and announced : `` As the adve ` sawies have wefused a weconciliation , please pwoceed . 
Take your pistols , and at the word thwee begin to advance . 
`` O-ne ! 
T-wo ! 
Thwee ! '' 
he shouted angrily and stepped aside . 
The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks , nearer and nearer to one another , beginning to see one another through the mist . 
They had the right to fire when they liked as they approached the barrier . 
Dolokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol , looking intently with his bright , sparkling blue eyes into his antagonist 's face . 
His mouth wore its usual semblance of a smile . 
`` So I can fire when I like ! '' 
said Pierre , and at the word `` three , '' he went quickly forward , missing the trodden path and stepping into the deep snow . 
He held the pistol in his right hand at arm 's length , apparently afraid of shooting himself with it . 
His left hand he held carefully back , because he wished to support his right hand with it and knew he must not do so . 
Having advanced six paces and strayed off the track into the snow , Pierre looked down at his feet , then quickly glanced at Dolokhov and , bending his finger as he had been shown , fired . 
Not at all expecting so loud a report , Pierre shuddered at the sound and then , smiling at his own sensations , stood still . 
The smoke , rendered denser by the mist , prevented him from seeing anything for an instant , but there was no second report as he had expected . 
He only heard Dolokhov 's hurried steps , and his figure came in view through the smoke . 
He was pressing one hand to his left side , while the other clutched his drooping pistol . 
His face was pale . 
Rostov ran toward him and said something . 
`` No-o-o ! '' 
muttered Dolokhov through his teeth , `` no , it 's not over . '' 
And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to the saber , he sank on the snow beside it . 
His left hand was bloody ; he wiped it on his coat and supported himself with it . 
His frowning face was pallid and quivered . 
`` Plea ... '' began Dolokhov , but could not at first pronounce the word . 
`` Please , '' he uttered with an effort . 
Pierre , hardly restraining his sobs , began running toward Dolokhov and was about to cross the space between the barriers , when Dolokhov cried : `` To your barrier ! '' 
and Pierre , grasping what was meant , stopped by his saber . 
Only ten paces divided them . 
Dolokhov lowered his head to the snow , greedily bit at it , again raised his head , adjusted himself , drew in his legs and sat up , seeking a firm center of gravity . 
He sucked and swallowed the cold snow , his lips quivered but his eyes , still smiling , glittered with effort and exasperation as he mustered his remaining strength . 
He raised his pistol and aimed . 
`` Sideways ! 
Cover yourself with your pistol ! '' 
ejaculated Nesvitski . 
`` Cover yourself ! '' 
even Denisov cried to his adversary . 
Pierre , with a gentle smile of pity and remorse , his arms and legs helplessly spread out , stood with his broad chest directly facing Dolokhov looked sorrowfully at him . 
Denisov , Rostov , and Nesvitski closed their eyes . 
At the same instant they heard a report and Dolokhov 's angry cry . 
`` Missed ! '' 
shouted Dolokhov , and he lay helplessly , face downwards on the snow . 
Pierre clutched his temples , and turning round went into the forest , trampling through the deep snow , and muttering incoherent words : `` Folly ... folly ! 
Death ... lies ... '' he repeated , puckering his face . 
Nesvitski stopped him and took him home . 
Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov . 
The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did not answer a word to the questions addressed to him . 
But on entering Moscow he suddenly came to and , lifting his head with an effort , took Rostov , who was sitting beside him , by the hand . 
Rostov was struck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tender expression on Dolokhov 's face . 
`` Well ? 
How do you feel ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Bad ! 
But it 's not that , my friend - '' said Dolokhov with a gasping voice . 
`` Where are we ? 
In Moscow , I know . 
I do n't matter , but I have killed her , killed ... She wo n't get over it ! 
She wo n't survive ... '' `` Who ? '' 
asked Rostov . 
`` My mother ! 
My mother , my angel , my adored angel mother , '' and Dolokhov pressed Rostov 's hand and burst into tears . 
When he had become a little quieter , he explained to Rostov that he was living with his mother , who , if she saw him dying , would not survive it . 
He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her . 
Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked , and to his great surprise learned that Dolokhov the brawler , Dolokhov the bully , lived in Moscow with an old mother and a hunchback sister , and was the most affectionate of sons and brothers . 
Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone . 
Both in Petersburg and in Moscow their house was always full of visitors . 
The night after the duel he did not go to his bedroom but , as he often did , remained in his father 's room , that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died . 
He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all that had happened to him , but could not do so . 
Such a storm of feelings , thoughts , and memories suddenly arose within him that he could not fall asleep , nor even remain in one place , but had to jump up and pace the room with rapid steps . 
Now he seemed to see her in the early days of their marriage , with bare shoulders and a languid , passionate look on her face , and then immediately he saw beside her Dolokhov 's handsome , insolent , hard , and mocking face as he had seen it at the banquet , and then that same face pale , quivering , and suffering , as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
he asked himself . 
