One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath . 
Unconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down , and then , testing her strength , ran upstairs again , observing the result . 
Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled , so she called again -- though she could hear Dunyasha coming -- called her in the deep chest tones in which she had been wont to sing , sing , and listened attentively to herself . 
She did not know and would not have believed it , but beneath the layer of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable , delicate young shoots of grass were already sprouting , which taking root would so cover with their living verdure the grief that weighed her down that it would soon no longer be seen or noticed . 
The wound had begun to heal from within . 
At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow , and the count insisted on Natasha 's going with her to consult the doctors . 
After the encounter at Vyazma , where Kutuzov had been unable to hold back his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemy and so on , the farther movement of the fleeing French , and of the Russians who pursued them , continued as far as Krasnoe without a battle . 
The flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing the French could not keep up with them ; cavalry and artillery horses broke down , and the information received of the movements of the French was never reliable . 
The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuous marching at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could not go any faster . 
To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is only necessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that , while not losing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino and less than a hundred prisoners , the Russian army which left that place a hundred thousand strong reached Krasnoe with only fifty thousand . 
The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to our army as the flight of the French was to theirs . 
The only difference was that the Russian army moved voluntarily , with no such threat of destruction as hung over the French , and that the sick Frenchmen were left behind in enemy hands while the sick Russians left behind were among their own people . 
The chief cause of the wastage of Napoleon 's army was the rapidity of its movement , and a convincing proof of this is the corresponding decrease of the Russian army . 
Kutuzov as far as was in his power , instead of trying to check the movement of the French as was desired in Petersburg and by the Russian army generals , directed his whole activity here , as he had done at Tarutino and Vyazma , to hastening it on while easing the movement of our army . 
But besides this , since the exhaustion and enormous diminution of the army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident , another reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itself to Kutuzov . 
The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French . 
The road the French would take was unknown , and so the closer our troops trod on their heels the greater distance they had to cover . 
Only by following at some distance could one cut across the zigzag path of the French . 
All the artful maneuvers suggested by our generals meant fresh movements of the army and a lengthening of its marches , whereas the only reasonable aim was to shorten those marches . 
To that end Kutuzov 's activity was directed during the whole campaign from Moscow to Vilna -- not casually or intermittently but so consistently that he never once deviated from it . 
Kutuzov felt and knew -- not by reasoning or science but with the whole of his Russian being -- what every Russian soldier felt : that the French were beaten , that the enemy was flying and must be driven out ; but at the same time he like the soldiers realized all the hardship of this march , the rapidity of which was unparalleled for such a time of the year . 
But to the generals , especially the foreign ones in the Russian army , who wished to distinguish themselves , to astonish somebody , and for some reason to capture a king or a duke -- it seemed that now - when any battle must be horrible and senseless -- was the very time to fight and conquer somebody . 
Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders when one after another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made with those soldiers -- ill-shod , insufficiently clad , and half starved -- who within a month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to half their number , and who at the best if the flight continued would have to go a greater distance than they had already traversed , before they reached the frontier . 
This longing to distinguish themselves , to maneuver , to overthrow , and to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russians stumbled on the French army . 
So it was at Krasnoe , where they expected to find one of the three French columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteen thousand men . 
Despite all Kutuzov 's efforts to avoid that ruinous encounter and to preserve his troops , the massacre of the broken mob of French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for three days . 
Toll wrote a disposition : `` The first column will march to so and so , '' etc. . 
And as usual nothing happened in accord with the disposition . 
Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over the French crowds that were running past , and demanded reinforcements which did not arrive . 
The French , avoiding the Russians , dispersed and hid themselves in the forest by night , making their way round as best they could , and continued their flight . 
Miloradovich , who said he did not want to know anything about the commissariat affairs of his detachment , and could never be found when he was wanted -- that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled himself -- who was fond of parleys with the French , sent envoys demanding their surrender , wasted time , and did not do what he was ordered to do . 
* Knight without fear and without reproach . 
`` I give you that column , lads , '' he said , riding up to the troops and pointing out the French to the cavalry . 
And the cavalry , with spurs and sabers urging on horses that could scarcely move , trotted with much effort to the column presented to them -- that is to say , to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold , frost-bitten , and starving -- and the column that had been presented to them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to do . 
At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners , several hundred cannon , and a stick called a `` marshal 's staff , '' and disputed as to who had distinguished himself and were pleased with their achievement -- though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon , or at least a marshal or a hero of some sort , and reproached one another and especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so . 
These men , carried away by their passions , were but blind tools of the most melancholy law of necessity , but considered themselves heroes and imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable deed . 
They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of the campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon , that he thought nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the Linen Factories because he was comfortable there , that at Krasnoe he checked the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite lost his head , and that it was probable that he had an understanding with Napoleon and had been bribed by him , and so on , and so on . 
Not only did his contemporaries , carried away by their passions , talk in this way , but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand , while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty , dissolute , weak old courtier , and by Russians as something indefinite - a sort of puppet useful only because he had a Russian name . 
In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering . 
The Emperor was dissatisfied with him . 
And in a history recently written by order of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was a cunning court liar , frightened of the name of Napoleon , and that by his blunders at Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russian army of the glory of complete victory over the French . 
* * History of the year 1812 . 
The character of Kutuzov and reflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at Krasnoe , by Bogdanovich . 
Such is the fate not of great men -LRB- grands hommes -RRB- whom the Russian mind does not acknowledge , but of those rare and always solitary individuals who , discerning the will of Providence , submit their personal will to it . 
The hatred and contempt of the crowd punish such men for discerning the higher laws . 
For Russian historians , strange and terrible to say , Napoleon - that most insignificant tool of history who never anywhere , even in exile , showed human dignity -- Napoleon is the object of adulation and enthusiasm ; he is grand . 
But Kutuzov -- the man who from the beginning to the end of his activity in 1812 , never once swerving by word or deed from Borodino to Vilna , presented an example exceptional in history of self-sacrifice and a present consciousness of the future importance of what was happening -- Kutuzov seems to them something indefinite and pitiful , and when speaking of him and of the year 1812 they always seem a little ashamed . 
And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whose activity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim ; and it would be difficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with the will of the whole people . 
Still more difficult would it be to find an instance in history of the aim of an historical personage being so completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov 's efforts were directed in 1812 . 
Kutuzov never talked of `` forty centuries looking down from the Pyramids , '' of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland , or of what he intended to accomplish or had accomplished ; in general he said nothing about himself , adopted no prose , always appeared to be the simplest and most ordinary of men , and said the simplest and most ordinary things . 
He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame de Stael , read novels , liked the society of pretty women , jested with generals , officers , and soldiers , and never contradicted those who tried to prove anything to him . 
When Count Rostopchin at the Yauza bridge galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for having caused the destruction of Moscow , and said : `` How was it you promised not to abandon Moscow without a battle ? '' 
Kutuzov replied : `` And I shall not abandon Moscow without a battle , '' though Moscow was then already abandoned . 
When Arakcheev , coming to him from the Emperor , said that Ermolov ought to be appointed chief of the artillery , Kutuzov replied : `` Yes , I was just saying so myself , '' though a moment before he had said quite the contrary . 
What did it matter to him -- who then alone amid a senseless crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of what was happening -- what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributed the calamities of Moscow to him or to himself ? 
Still less could it matter to him who was appointed chief of the artillery . 
Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man -- who by experience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and the words serving as their expression are not what move people -- use quite meaningless words that happened to enter his head . 
But that man , so heedless of his words , did not once during the whole time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the single aim toward which he moved throughout the whole war . 
Obviously in spite of himself , in very diverse circumstances , he repeatedly expressed his real thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not be understood . 
Beginning with the battle of Borodino , from which time his disagreement with those about him began , he alone said that the battle of Borodino was a victory , and repeated this both verbally and in his dispatches and reports up to the time of his death . 
He alone said that the loss of Moscow is not the loss of Russia . 
In reply to Lauriston 's proposal of peace , he said : There can be no peace , for such is the people 's will . 
He alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are useless , everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could desire ; that the enemy must be offered `` a golden bridge '' ; that neither the Tarutino , the Vyazma , nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary ; that we must keep some force to reach the frontier with , and that he would not sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen . 
And this courtier , as he is described to us , who lies to Arakcheev to please the Emperor , he alone -- incurring thereby the Emperor 's displeasure -- said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is useless and harmful . 
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the events . 
His actions -- without the smallest deviation -- were all directed to one and the same threefold end : -LRB- 1 -RRB- to brace all his strength for conflict with the French , -LRB- 2 -RRB- to defeat them , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- to drive them out of Russia , minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people and of our army . 
This procrastinator Kutuzov , whose motto was `` Patience and Time , '' this enemy of decisive action , gave battle at Borodino , investing the preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity . 
This Kutuzov who before the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost , he alone , in contradiction to everyone else , declared till his death that Borodino was a victory , despite the assurance of generals that the battle was lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after winning a battle was unprecedented . 
He alone during the whole retreat insisted that battles , which were useless then , should not be fought , and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russia crossed . 
It is easy now to understand the significance of these events -- if only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals -- for the events and results now lie before us . 
But how did that old man , alone , in opposition to the general opinion , so truly discern the importance of the people 's view of the events that in all his activity he was never once untrue to it ? 
The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning of the events then occuring lay in the national feeling which he possessed in full purity and strength . 
Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feeling caused the people in so strange a manner , contrary to the Tsar 's wish , to select him -- an old man in disfavor -- to be their representative in the national war . 
And only that feeling placed him on that highest human pedestal from which he , the commander in chief , devoted all his powers not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showing pity on them . 
That simple , modest , and therefore truly great , figure could not be cast in the false mold of a European hero -- the supposed ruler of men -- that history has invented . 
To a lackey no man can be great , for a lackey has his own conception of greatness . 
The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battle of Krasnoe . 
Toward evening -- after much disputing and many mistakes made by generals who did not go to their proper places , and after adjutants had been sent about with counterorders -- when it had become plain that the enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could and would be no battle , Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whither his headquarters had that day been transferred . 
The day was clear and frosty . 
Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plump little white horse , followed by an enormous suite of discontented generals who whispered among themselves behind his back . 
All along the road groups of French prisoners captured that day -LRB- there were seven thousand of them -RRB- were crowding to warm themselves at campfires . 
Near Dobroe an immense crowd of tattered prisoners , buzzing with talk and wrapped and bandaged in anything they had been able to get hold of , were standing in the road beside a long row of unharnessed French guns . 
At the approach of the commander in chief the buzz of talk ceased and all eyes were fixed on Kutuzov who , wearing a white cap with a red band and a padded overcoat that bulged on his round shoulders , moved slowly along the road on his white horse . 
One of the generals was reporting to him where the guns and prisoners had been captured . 
Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the general was saying . 
He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as he gazed attentively and fixedly at these prisoners , who presented a specially wretched appearance . 
Most of them were disfigured by frost-bitten noses and cheeks , and nearly all had red , swollen and festering eyes . 
One group of the French stood close to the road , and two of them , one of whom had his face covered with sores , were tearing a piece of raw flesh with their hands . 
There was something horrible and bestial in the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in the malevolent expression with which , after a glance at Kutuzov , the soldier with the sores immediately turned away and went on with what he was doing . 
Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers . 
He puckered his face , screwed up his eyes , and pensively swayed his head . 
At another spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting a Frenchman on the shoulder , saying something to him in a friendly manner , and Kutuzov with the same expression on his face again swayed his head . 
`` What were you saying ? '' 
he asked the general , who continuing his report directed the commander in chief 's attention to some standards captured from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment . 
`` Ah , the standards ! '' 
said Kutuzov , evidently detaching himself with difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him . 
He looked about him absently . 
Thousands of eyes were looking at him from all sides awaiting a word from him . 
He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment , sighed deeply , and closed his eyes . 
One of his suite beckoned to the soldiers carrying the standards to advance and surround the commander in chief with them . 
