The news of Count Bezukhov 's death reached us before your letter and my father was much affected by it . 
He says the count was the last representative but one of the great century , and that it is his own turn now , but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as possible . 
God preserve us from that terrible misfortune ! 
I can not agree with you about Pierre , whom I knew as a child . 
He always seemed to me to have an excellent heart , and that is the quality I value most in people . 
As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince Vasili , it is very sad for both . 
Ah , my dear friend , our divine Saviour 's words , that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God , are terribly true . 
I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre . 
So young , and burdened with such riches -- to what temptations he will be exposed ! 
If I were asked what I desire most on earth , it would be to be poorer than the poorest beggar . 
A thousand thanks , dear friend , for the volume you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow . 
Yet since you tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak human understanding can not grasp , it seems to me rather useless to spend time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit . 
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubts and excite their imagination , giving them a bent for exaggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity . 
Let us rather read the Epistles and Gospels . 
Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain ; for how can we , miserable sinners that we are , know the terrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal ? 
Let us rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below . 
Let us try to conform to them and follow them , and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble human minds roam , the better we shall please God , who rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him ; and the less we seek to fathom what He has been pleased to conceal from us , the sooner will He vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit . 
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor , but has only told me that he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili . 
In regard to this project of marriage for me , I will tell you , dear sweet friend , that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must conform . 
However painful it may be to me , should the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can , without disquieting myself by examining my feelings toward him whom He may give me for husband . 
I have had a letter from my brother , who announces his speedy arrival at Bald Hills with his wife . 
This pleasure will be but a brief one , however , for he will leave , us again to take part in this unhappy war into which we have been drawn , God knows how or why . 
Not only where you are -- at the heart of affairs and of the world -- is the talk all of war , even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature -- which townsfolk consider characteristic of the country -- rumors of war are heard and painfully felt . 
My father talks of nothing but marches and countermarches , things of which I understand nothing ; and the day before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a heartrending scene ... . 
It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our people and starting to join the army . 
You should have seen the state of the mothers , wives , and children of the men who were going and should have heard the sobs . 
It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour , Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries -- and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing one another . 
Adieu , dear and kind friend ; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care ! 
MARY `` Ah , you are sending off a letter , Princess ? 
I have already dispatched mine . 
I have written to my poor mother , '' said the smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne rapidly , in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r 's . 
She brought into Princess Mary 's strenuous , mournful , and gloomy world a quite different atmosphere , careless , lighthearted , and self-satisfied . 
`` Princess , I must warn you , '' she added , lowering her voice and evidently listening to herself with pleasure , and speaking with exaggerated grasseyement , `` the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich . 
He is in a very bad humor , very morose . 
Be prepared . '' 
`` Ah , dear friend , '' replied Princess Mary , `` I have asked you never to warn me of the humor my father is in . 
I do not allow myself to judge him and would not have others do so . '' 
The princess glanced at her watch and , seeing that she was five minutes late in starting her practice on the clavichord , went into the sitting room with a look of alarm . 
Between twelve and two o'clock , as the day was mapped out , the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord . 
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of the prince , who was in his large study . 
From the far side of the house through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages -- twenty times repeated -- of a sonata by Dussek . 
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the porch . 
Prince Andrew got out of the carriage , helped his little wife to alight , and let her pass into the house before him . 
Old Tikhon , wearing a wig , put his head out of the door of the antechamber , reported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping , and hastily closed the door . 
Tikhon knew that neither the son 's arrival nor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day . 
Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tikhon ; he looked at his watch as if to ascertain whether his father 's habits had changed since he was at home last , and , having assured himself that they had not , he turned to his wife . 
`` He will get up in twenty minutes . 
Let us go across to Mary 's room , '' he said . 
The little princess had grown stouter during this time , but her eyes and her short , downy , smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as merrily and prettily as ever . 
`` Why , this is a palace ! '' 
she said to her husband , looking around with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball . 
`` Let 's come , quick , quick ! '' 
And with a glance round , she smiled at Tikhon , at her husband , and at the footman who accompanied them . 
`` Is that Mary practicing ? 
Let 's go quietly and take her by surprise . '' 
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression . 
`` You 've grown older , Tikhon , '' he said in passing to the old man , who kissed his hand . 
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came , the pretty , fair haired Frenchwoman , Mademoiselle Bourienne , rushed out apparently beside herself with delight . 
`` Ah ! 
what joy for the princess ! '' 
exclaimed she : `` At last ! 
I must let her know . '' 
`` No , no , please not ... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne , '' said the little princess , kissing her . 
`` I know you already through my sister-in-law 's friendship for you . 
She was not expecting us ? '' 
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata . 
Prince Andrew stopped and made a grimace , as if expecting something unpleasant . 
The little princess entered the room . 
The passage broke off in the middle , a cry was heard , then Princess Mary 's heavy tread and the sound of kissing . 
When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses , who had only met once before for a short time at his wedding , were in each other 's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to touch . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her heart , with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to laugh . 
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned , as lovers of music do when they hear a false note . 
The two women let go of one another , and then , as if afraid of being too late , seized each other 's hands , kissing them and pulling them away , and again began kissing each other on the face , and then to Prince Andrew 's surprise both began to cry and kissed again . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry . 
Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease , but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they should cry , and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting . 
`` Ah ! 
my dear ! 
... Ah ! 
Mary ! '' 
they suddenly exclaimed , and then laughed . 
`` I dreamed last night ... '' -- `` You were not expecting us ? 
... '' - `` Ah ! 
Mary , you have got thinner ? 
... '' `` And you have grown stouter ! 
... '' `` I knew the princess at once , '' put in Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` And I had no idea ! 
... '' exclaimed Princess Mary . 
`` Ah , Andrew , I did not see you . '' 
Prince Andrew and his sister , hand in hand , kissed one another , and he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever . 
Princess Mary had turned toward her brother , and through her tears the loving , warm , gentle look of her large luminous eyes , very beautiful at that moment , rested on Prince Andrew 's face . 
The little princess talked incessantly , her short , downy upper lip continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of glittering teeth and sparkling eyes . 
She told of an accident they had had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her condition , and immediately after that informed them that she had left all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have to dress in here ; and that Andrew had quite changed , and that Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man , and that there was a suitor for Mary , a real one , but that they would talk of that later . 
Princess Mary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and sadness . 
It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of her sister-in-law 's words . 
In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother : `` So you are really going to the war , Andrew ? '' 
she said sighing . 
Lise sighed too . 
`` Yes , and even tomorrow , '' replied her brother . 
`` He is leaving me here , God knows why , when he might have had promotion ... '' Princess Mary did not listen to the end , but continuing her train of thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure . 
`` Is it certain ? '' 
