In what light must I appear to them ! '' 
thought he , thinking of his troops . 
`` Here she is , the reward for all those fainthearted men , '' he reflected , glancing at those near him and at the troops who were approaching and forming up . 
`` One word from me , one movement of my hand , and that ancient capital of the Tsars would perish . 
But my clemency is always ready to descend upon the vanquished . 
I must be magnanimous and truly great . 
But no , it ca n't be true that I am in Moscow , '' he suddenly thought . 
`` Yet here she is lying at my feet , with her golden domes and crosses scintillating and twinkling in the sunshine . 
But I shall spare her . 
On the ancient monuments of barbarism and despotism I will inscribe great words of justice and mercy ... . 
It is just this which Alexander will feel most painfully , I know him . '' 
-LRB- It seemed to Napoleon that the chief import of what was taking place lay in the personal struggle between himself and Alexander . -RRB- 
`` From the height of the Kremlin -- yes , there is the Kremlin , yes -- I will give them just laws ; I will teach them the meaning of true civilization , I will make generations of boyars remember their conqueror with love . 
I will tell the deputation that I did not , and do not , desire war , that I have waged war only against the false policy of their court ; that I love and respect Alexander and that in Moscow I will accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people . 
I do not wish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored monarch . 
` Boyars , ' I will say to them , ' I do not desire war , I desire the peace and welfare of all my subjects . ' 
However , I know their presence will inspire me , and I shall speak to them as I always do : clearly , impressively , and majestically . 
But can it be true that I am in Moscow ? 
Yes , there she lies . '' 
`` Qu'on m ` amene les boyars , '' * said he to his suite . 
* `` Bring the boyars to me . '' 
A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch the boyars . 
Two hours passed . 
Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in the same place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation . 
His speech to the boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination . 
That speech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it . 
He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intended to adopt toward Moscow . 
In his imagination he appointed days for assemblies at the palace of the Tsars , at which Russian notables and his own would mingle . 
He mentally appointed a governor , one who would win the hearts of the people . 
Having learned that there were many charitable institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that he would shower favors on them all . 
He thought that , as in Africa he had to put on a burnoose and sit in a mosque , so in Moscow he must be beneficent like the Tsars . 
And in order finally to touch the hearts of the Russians -- and being like all Frenchmen unable to imagine anything sentimental without a reference to ma chere , ma tendre , ma pauvre mere * -- he decided that he would place an inscription on all these establishments in large letters : `` This establishment is dedicated to my dear mother . '' 
Or no , it should be simply : Maison de ma Mere , * -LSB- 2 -RSB- he concluded . 
`` But am I really in Moscow ? 
Yes , here it lies before me , but why is the deputation from the city so long in appearing ? '' 
he wondered . 
* `` My dear , my tender , my poor mother . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` House of my Mother . '' 
Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on in whispers among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite . 
Those sent to fetch the deputation had returned with the news that Moscow was empty , that everyone had left it . 
The faces of those who were not conferring together were pale and perturbed . 
They were not alarmed by the fact that Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants -LRB- grave as that fact seemed -RRB- , but by the question how to tell the Emperor -- without putting him in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous -- that he had been awaiting the boyars so long in vain : that there were drunken mobs left in Moscow but no one else . 
Some said that a deputation of some sort must be scraped together , others disputed that opinion and maintained that the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared , and then told the truth . 
`` He will have to be told , all the same , '' said some gentlemen of the suite . 
`` But , gentlemen ... '' The position was the more awkward because the Emperor , meditating upon his magnanimous plans , was pacing patiently up and down before the outspread map , occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from under his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile . 
`` But it 's impossible ... '' declared the gentlemen of the suite , shrugging their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word - le ridicule ... At last the Emperor , tired of futile expectation , his actor 's instinct suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out was beginning to lose its sublimity , gave a sign with his hand . 
A single report of a signaling gun followed , and the troops , who were already spread out on different sides of Moscow , moved into the city through Tver , Kaluga , and Dorogomilov gates . 
Faster and faster , vying with one another , they moved at the double or at a trot , vanishing amid the clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar of mingling shouts . 
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as the Dorogomilov gate , but there again stopped and , dismounting from his horse , paced for a long time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart , awaiting the deputation . 
Meanwhile Moscow was empty . 
There were still people in it , perhaps a fiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained , but it was empty . 
It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty . 
In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glance it seems as much alive as other hives . 
The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of the midday sun as gaily as around the living hives ; from a distance it smells of honey like the others , and bees fly in and out in the same way . 
But one has only to observe that hive to realize that there is no longer any life in it . 
The bees do not fly in the same way , the smell and the sound that meet the beekeeper are not the same . 
To the beekeeper 's tap on the wall of the sick hive , instead of the former instant unanimous humming of tens of thousands of bees with their abdomens threateningly compressed , and producing by the rapid vibration of their wings an aerial living sound , the only reply is a disconnected buzzing from different parts of the deserted hive . 
From the alighting board , instead of the former spirituous fragrant smell of honey and venom , and the warm whiffs of crowded life , comes an odor of emptiness and decay mingling with the smell of honey . 
There are no longer sentinels sounding the alarm with their abdomens raised , and ready to die in defense of the hive . 
There is no longer the measured quiet sound of throbbing activity , like the sound of boiling water , but diverse discordant sounds of disorder . 
In and out of the hive long black robber bees smeared with honey fly timidly and shiftily . 
They do not sting , but crawl away from danger . 
Formerly only bees laden with honey flew into the hive , and they flew out empty ; now they fly out laden . 
The beekeeper opens the lower part of the hive and peers in . 
Instead of black , glossy bees -- tamed by toil , clinging to one another 's legs and drawing out the wax , with a ceaseless hum of labor - that used to hang in long clusters down to the floor of the hive , drowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately in various directions on the floor and walls of the hive . 
Instead of a neatly glued floor , swept by the bees with the fanning of their wings , there is a floor littered with bits of wax , excrement , dying bees scarcely moving their legs , and dead ones that have not been cleared away . 
The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines the super . 
Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in the combs and keeping the brood warm , he sees the skillful complex structures of the combs , but no longer in their former state of purity . 
All is neglected and foul . 
Black robber bees are swiftly and stealthily prowling about the combs , and the short home bees , shriveled and listless as if they were old , creep slowly about without trying to hinder the robbers , having lost all motive and all sense of life . 
Drones , bumblebees , wasps , and butterflies knock awkwardly against the walls of the hive in their flight . 
Here and there among the cells containing dead brood and honey an angry buzzing can sometimes be heard . 
Here and there a couple of bees , by force of habit and custom cleaning out the brood cells , with efforts beyond their strength laboriously drag away a dead bee or bumblebee without knowing why they do it . 
In another corner two old bees are languidly fighting , or cleaning themselves , or feeding one another , without themselves knowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile intent . 
In a third place a crowd of bees , crushing one another , attack some victim and fight and smother it , and the victim , enfeebled or killed , drops from above slowly and lightly as a feather , among the heap of corpses . 
The keeper opens the two center partitions to examine the brood cells . 
In place of the former close dark circles formed by thousands of bees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery of generation , he sees hundreds of dull , listless , and sleepy shells of bees . 
They have almost all died unawares , sitting in the sanctuary they had guarded and which is now no more . 
They reek of decay and death . 
Only a few of them still move , rise , and feebly fly to settle on the enemy 's hand , lacking the spirit to die stinging him ; the rest are dead and fall as lightly as fish scales . 
The beekeeper closes the hive , chalks a mark on it , and when he has time tears out its contents and burns it clean . 
So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon , weary , uneasy , and morose , paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezski rampart , awaiting what to his mind was a necessary , if but formal , observance of the proprieties -- a deputation . 
In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few people aimlessly moving about , following their old habits and hardly aware of what they were doing . 
When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow was empty , he looked angrily at his informant , turned away , and silently continued to walk to and fro . 
`` My carriage ! '' 
he said . 
He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove into the suburb . 
`` Moscow deserted ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` What an incredible event ! '' 
He did not drive into the town , but put up at an inn in the Dorogomilov suburb . 
The coup de theatre had not come off . 
The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock at night till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the wounded and the last of the inhabitants who were leaving . 
The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place at the Stone , Moskva , and Yauza bridges . 
While the troops , dividing into two parts when passing around the Kremlin , were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges , a great many soldiers , taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion , turned back from the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the church of Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate , back up the hill to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easily take things not belonging to them . 
Crowds of the kind seen at cheap sales filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar . 
But there were no dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customers to enter ; there were no hawkers , nor the usual motley crowd of female purchasers -- but only soldiers , in uniforms and overcoats though without muskets , entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silently making their way out through its passages with bundles . 
Tradesmen and their assistants -LRB- of whom there were but few -RRB- moved about among the soldiers quite bewildered . 
They unlocked their shops and locked them up again , and themselves carried goods away with the help their assistants . 
On the square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beating the muster call . 
