Do you know what he said to the Emperor ? '' 
And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken by Kutuzov to the Emperor . 
`` I can neither punish him if he does wrong nor reward him if he does right . '' 
`` Oh , a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov ! 
I have known him a long time ! '' 
`` They even say , '' remarked the `` man of great merit '' who did not yet possess courtly tact , `` that his excellency made it an express condition that the sovereign himself should not be with the army . '' 
As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovna turned away from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh at his naivete . 
While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had already passed Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow . 
Napoleon 's historian Thiers , like other of his historians , trying to justify his hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow against his will . 
He is as right as other historians who look for the explanation of historic events in the will of one man ; he is as right as the Russian historians who maintain that Napoleon was drawn to Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders . 
Here besides the law of retrospection , which regards all the past as a preparation for events that subsequently occur , the law of reciprocity comes in , confusing the whole matter . 
A good chessplayer having lost a game is sincerely convinced that his loss resulted from a mistake he made and looks for that mistake in the opening , but forgets that at each stage of the game there were similar mistakes and that none of his moves were perfect . 
He only notices the mistake to which he pays attention , because his opponent took advantage of it . 
How much more complex than this is the game of war , which occurs under certain limits of time , and where it is not one will that manipulates lifeless objects , but everything results from innumerable conflicts of various wills ! 
After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma , and then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche , but it happened that owing to a conjunction of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not give battle till they reached Borodino , seventy miles from Moscow . 
From Vyazma Napoleon ordered a direct advance on Moscow . 
Moscou , la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire , la ville sacree des peuples d'Alexandre , Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en forme de pagodes chinoises , * this Moscow gave Napoleon 's imagination no rest . 
On the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his light bay bobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards , his bodyguard , his pages , and aides-de-camp . 
Berthier , his chief of staff , dropped behind to question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry . 
Followed by Lelorgne d'Ideville , an interpreter , he overtook Napoleon at a gallop and reined in his horse with an amused expression . 
* `` Moscow , the Asiatic capital of this great empire , the sacred city of Alexander 's people , Moscow with its innumerable churches shaped like Chinese pagodas . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
asked Napoleon . 
`` One of Platov 's Cossacks says that Platov 's corps is joining up with the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander in chief . 
He is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow . '' 
Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse and bring the man to him . 
He wished to talk to him himself . 
Several adjutants galloped off , and an hour later , Lavrushka , the serf Denisov had handed over to Rostov , rode up to Napoleon in an orderly 's jacket and on a French cavalry saddle , with a merry , and tipsy face . 
Napoleon told him to ride by his side and began questioning him . 
`` You are a Cossack ? '' 
`` Yes , a Cossack , your Honor . '' 
`` The Cossack , not knowing in what company he was , for Napoleon 's plain appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Oriental mind the presence of a monarch , talked with extreme familiarity of the incidents of the war , '' says Thiers , narrating this episode . 
In reality Lavrushka , having got drunk the day before and left his master dinnerless , had been whipped and sent to the village in quest of chickens , where he engaged in looting till the French took him prisoner . 
Lavrushka was one of those coarse , bare-faced lackeys who have seen all sorts of things , consider it necessary to do everything in a mean and cunning way , are ready to render any sort of service to their master , and are keen at guessing their master 's baser impulses , especially those prompted by vanity and pettiness . 
Finding himself in the company of Napoleon , whose identity he had easily and surely recognized , Lavrushka was not in the least abashed but merely did his utmost to gain his new master 's favor . 
He knew very well that this was Napoleon , but Napoleon 's presence could no more intimidate him than Rostov 's , or a sergeant major 's with the rods , would have done , for he had nothing that either the sergeant major or Napoleon could deprive him of . 
So he rattled on , telling all the gossip he had heard among the orderlies . 
Much of it true . 
But when Napoleon asked him whether the Russians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not , Lavrushka screwed up his eyes and considered . 
In this question he saw subtle cunning , as men of his type see cunning in everything , so he frowned and did not answer immediately . 
`` It 's like this , '' he said thoughtfully , `` if there 's a battle soon , yours will win . 
That 's right . 
But if three days pass , then after that , well , then that same battle will not soon be over . '' 
Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleon thus : `` If a battle takes place within the next three days the French will win , but if later , God knows what will happen . '' 
Napoleon did not smile , though he was evidently in high good humor , and he ordered these words to be repeated . 
Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further , pretending not to know who Napoleon was , added : `` We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody in the world , but we are a different matter ... '' -- without knowing why or how this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end . 
The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase , and Bonaparte smiled . 
`` The young Cossack made his mighty interlocutor smile , '' says Thiers . 
After riding a few paces in silence , Napoleon turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the news that he was talking to the Emperor himself , to that very Emperor who had written his immortally victorious name on the Pyramids , would affect this enfant du Don . 
* * `` Child of the Don . '' 
The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka . 
Lavrushka , understanding that this was done to perplex him and that Napoleon expected him to be frightened , to gratify his new masters promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck , opened his eyes wide , and assumed the expression he usually put on when taken to be whipped . 
`` As soon as Napoleon 's interpreter had spoken , '' says Thiers , `` the Cossack , seized by amazement , did not utter another word , but rode on , his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reached him across the steppes of the East . 
All his loquacity was suddenly arrested and replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration . 
Napoleon , after making the Cossack a present , had him set free like a bird restored to its native fields . '' 
Napoleon rode on , dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to his imagination , and `` the bird restored to its native fields '' galloped to our outposts , inventing on the way all that had not taken place but that he meant to relate to his comrades . 
What had really taken place he did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worth telling . 
He found the Cossacks , inquired for the regiment operating with Platov 's detachment and by evening found his master , Nicholas Rostov , quartered at Yankovo . 
Rostov was just mounting to go for a ride round the neighboring villages with Ilyin ; he let Lavrushka have another horse and took him along with him . 
Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrew supposed . 
After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenly seemed to awake as from a dream . 
He ordered the militiamen to be called up from the villages and armed , and wrote a letter to the commander in chief informing him that he had resolved to remain at Bald Hills to the last extremity and to defend it , leaving to the commander in chief 's discretion to take measures or not for the defense of Bald Hills , where one of Russia 's oldest generals would be captured or killed , and he announced to his household that he would remain at Bald Hills . 
But while himself remaining , he gave instructions for the departure of the princess and Dessalles with the little prince to Bogucharovo and thence to Moscow . 
Princess Mary , alarmed by her father 's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy , could not bring herself to leave him alone and for the first time in her life ventured to disobey him . 
She refused to go away and her father 's fury broke over her in a terrible storm . 
He repeated every injustice he had ever inflicted on her . 
Trying to convict her , he told her she had worn him out , had caused his quarrel with his son , had harbored nasty suspicions of him , making it the object of her life to poison his existence , and he drove her from his study telling her that if she did not go away it was all the same to him . 
He declared that he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not to dare to let him see her . 
The fact that he did not , as she had feared , order her to be carried away by force but only told her not to let him see her cheered Princess Mary . 
She knew it was a proof that in the depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and had not gone away . 
The morning after little Nicholas had left , the old prince donned his full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief . 
His caleche was already at the door . 
Princess Mary saw him walk out of the house in his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the garden to review his armed peasants and domestic serfs . 
She sat by the window listening to his voice which reached her from the garden . 
Suddenly several men came running up the avenue with frightened faces . 
Princess Mary ran out to the porch , down the flower-bordered path , and into the avenue . 
A large crowd of militiamen and domestics were moving toward her , and in their midst several men were supporting by the armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform and decorations . 
She ran up to him and , in the play of the sunlight that fell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue , could not be sure what change there was in his face . 
All she could see was that his former stern and determined expression had altered to one of timidity and submission . 
On seeing his daughter he moved his helpless lips and made a hoarse sound . 
It was impossible to make out what he wanted . 
He was lifted up , carried to his study , and laid on the very couch he had so feared of late . 
The doctor , who was fetched that same night , bled him and said that the prince had had a seizure paralyzing his right side . 
It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills , and next day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo , the doctor accompanying him . 
By the time they reached Bogucharovo , Dessalles and the little prince had already left for Moscow . 
For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in the new house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo , ever in the same state , getting neither better nor worse . 
He was unconscious and lay like a distorted corpse . 
He muttered unceasingly , his eyebrows and lips twitching , and it was impossible to tell whether he understood what was going on around him or not . 
One thing was certain -- that he was suffering and wished to say something . 
But what it was , no one could tell : it might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man , or it might relate to public affairs , or possibly to family concerns . 
The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and was due to physical causes ; but Princess Mary thought he wished to tell her something , and the fact that her presence always increased his restlessness confirmed her opinion . 
He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally . 
There was no hope of recovery . 
It was impossible for him to travel , it would not do to let him die on the road . 
`` Would it not be better if the end did come , the very end ? '' 
Princess Mary sometimes thought . 
Night and day , hardly sleeping at all , she watched him and , terrible to say , often watched him not with hope of finding signs of improvement but wishing to find symptoms of the approach of the end . 
Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself , yet there it was . 
And what seemed still more terrible to her was that since her father 's illness began -LRB- perhaps even sooner , when she stayed with him expecting something to happen -RRB- , all the personal desires and hopes that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened . 
Thoughts that had not entered her mind for years -- thoughts of a life free from the fear of her father , and even the possibility of love and of family happiness -- floated continually in her imagination like temptations of the devil . 
