Two young citizens were joking with some serf girls who were cracking nuts . 
All these conversations , especially the joking with the girls , were such as might have had a particular charm for Petya at his age , but they did not interest him now . 
He sat on his elevation -- the pedestal of the cannon -- still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor and by his love for him . 
The feeling of pain and fear he had experienced when he was being crushed , together with that of rapture , still further intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion . 
Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from the embankment , to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks , and the crowd rushed impetuously toward the embankment to watch the firing . 
Petya too would have run there , but the clerk who had taken the young gentleman under his protection stopped him . 
The firing was still proceeding when officers , generals , and gentlemen-in-waiting came running out of the cathedral , and after them others in a more leisurely manner : caps were again raised , and those who had run to look at the cannon ran back again . 
At last four men in uniforms and sashes emerged from the cathedral doors . 
`` Hurrah ! 
hurrah ! '' 
shouted the crowd again . 
`` Which is he ? 
Which ? '' 
asked Petya in a tearful voice , of those around him , but no one answered him , everybody was too excited ; and Petya , fixing on one of those four men , whom he could not clearly see for the tears of joy that filled his eyes , concentrated all his enthusiasm on him -- though it happened not to be the Emperor - frantically shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
and resolved that tomorrow , come what might , he would join the army . 
The crowd ran after the Emperor , followed him to the palace , and began to disperse . 
It was already late , and Petya had not eaten anything and was drenched with perspiration , yet he did not go home but stood with that diminishing , but still considerable , crowd before the palace while the Emperor dined -- looking in at the palace windows , expecting he knew not what , and envying alike the notables he saw arriving at the entrance to dine with the Emperor and the court footmen who served at table , glimpses of whom could be seen through the windows . 
While the Emperor was dining , Valuev , looking out of the window , said : `` The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again . '' 
The dinner was nearly over , and the Emperor , munching a biscuit , rose and went out onto the balcony . 
The people , with Petya among them , rushed toward the balcony . 
`` Angel ! 
Dear one ! 
Hurrah ! 
Father ! 
... '' cried the crowd , and Petya with it , and again the women and men of weaker mold , Petya among them , wept with joy . 
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke off , fell on the balcony parapet , and then to the ground . 
A coachman in a jerkin , who stood nearest , sprang forward and snatched it up . 
Several people in the crowd rushed at the coachman . 
Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony . 
Petya 's eyes grew bloodshot , and still more excited by the danger of being crushed , he rushed at the biscuits . 
He did not know why , but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar 's hand and he felt that he must not give way . 
He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was catching at a biscuit ; the old woman did not consider herself defeated though she was lying on the ground -- she grabbed at some biscuits but her hand did not reach them . 
Petya pushed her hand away with his knee , seized a biscuit , and as if fearing to be too late , again shouted `` Hurrah ! '' 
with a voice already hoarse . 
The Emperor went in , and after that the greater part of the crowd began to disperse . 
`` There ! 
I said if only we waited -- and so it was ! '' 
was being joyfully said by various people . 
Happy as Petya was , he felt sad at having to go home knowing that all the enjoyment of that day was over . 
He did not go straight home from the Kremlin , but called on his friend Obolenski , who was fifteen and was also entering the regiment . 
On returning home Petya announced resolutely and firmly that if he was not allowed to enter the service he would run away . 
And next day , Count Ilya Rostov -- though he had not yet quite yielded -- went to inquire how he could arrange for Petya to serve where there would be least danger . 
Two days later , on the fifteenth of July , an immense number of carriages were standing outside the Sloboda Palace . 
The great halls were full . 
In the first were the nobility and gentry in their uniforms , in the second bearded merchants in full-skirted coats of blue cloth and wearing medals . 
In the noblemen 's hall there was an incessant movement and buzz of voices . 
The chief magnates sat on high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of the Emperor , but most of the gentry were strolling about the room . 
All these nobles , whom Pierre met every day at the Club or in their own houses , were in uniform -- some in that of Catherine 's day , others in that of Emperor Paul , others again in the new uniforms of Alexander 's time or the ordinary uniform of the nobility , and the general characteristic of being in uniform imparted something strange and fantastic to these diverse and familiar personalities , both old and young . 
The old men , dim-eyed , toothless , bald , sallow , and bloated , or gaunt and wrinkled , were especially striking . 
For the most part they sat quietly in their places and were silent , or , if they walked about and talked , attached themselves to someone younger . 
On all these faces , as on the faces of the crowd Petya had seen in the Square , there was a striking contradiction : the general expectation of a solemn event , and at the same time the everyday interests in a boston card party , Peter the cook , Zinaida Dmitrievna 's health , and so on . 
Pierre was there too , buttoned up since early morning in a nobleman 's uniform that had become too tight for him . 
He was agitated ; this extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of the merchant-class -- les etats generaux -LRB- States-General -RRB- -- evoked in him a whole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeply graven in his soul : thoughts of the Contrat social and the French Revolution . 
The words that had struck him in the Emperor 's appeal - that the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with his people -- strengthened this idea . 
And imagining that in this direction something important which he had long awaited was drawing near , he strolled about watching and listening to conversations , but nowhere finding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him . 
The Emperor 's manifesto was read , evoking enthusiasm , and then all moved about discussing it . 
Besides the ordinary topics of conversation , Pierre heard questions of where the marshals of the nobility were to stand when the Emperor entered , when a ball should be given in the Emperor 's honor , whether they should group themselves by districts or by whole provinces ... and so on ; but as soon as the war was touched on , or what the nobility had been convened for , the talk became undecided and indefinite . 
Then all preferred listening to speaking . 
A middle-aged man , handsome and virile , in the uniform of a retired naval officer , was speaking in one of the rooms , and a small crowd was pressing round him . 
Pierre went up to the circle that had formed round the speaker and listened . 
Count Ilya Rostov , in a military uniform of Catherine 's time , was sauntering with a pleasant smile among the crowd , with all of whom he was acquainted . 
He too approached that group and listened with a kindly smile and nods of approval , as he always did , to what the speaker was saying . 
The retired naval man was speaking very boldly , as was evident from the expression on the faces of the listeners and from the fact that some people Pierre knew as the meekest and quietest of men walked away disapprovingly or expressed disagreement with him . 
Pierre pushed his way into the middle of the group , listened , and convinced himself that the man was indeed a liberal , but of views quite different from his own . 
The naval officer spoke in a particularly sonorous , musical , and aristocratic baritone voice , pleasantly swallowing his r 's and generally slurring his consonants : the voice of a man calling out to his servant , `` Heah ! 
Bwing me my pipe ! '' 
It was indicative of dissipation and the exercise of authority . 
`` What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for the Empewah ? 
Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte ` n ? 
If the noble awistocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit , it can show its loyalty to our sov ` weign the Empewah in other ways . 
Have we fo ` gotten the waising of the militia in the yeah ` seven ? 
All that did was to enwich the pwiests ' sons and thieves and wobbahs ... '' Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval . 
`` And was our militia of any use to the Empia ? 
Not at all ! 
It only wuined our farming ! 
Bettah have another conscwiption ... o ' ou ' men will wetu 'n neithah soldiers no ' peasants , and we 'll get only depwavity fwom them . 
The nobility do n't gwudge theah lives -- evewy one of us will go and bwing in more wecwuits , and the sov ` weign '' -LRB- that was the way he referred to the Emperor -RRB- `` need only say the word and we 'll all die fo ' him ! '' 
added the orator with animation . 
Count Rostov 's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre , but Pierre wanted to speak himself . 
He pushed forward , feeling stirred , but not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say . 
Scarcely had he opened his mouth when one of the senators , a man without a tooth in his head , with a shrewd though angry expression , standing near the first speaker , interrupted him . 
Evidently accustomed to managing debates and to maintaining an argument , he began in low but distinct tones : `` I imagine , sir , '' said he , mumbling with his toothless mouth , `` that we have been summoned here not to discuss whether it 's best for the empire at the present moment to adopt conscription or to call out the militia . 
We have been summoned to reply to the appeal with which our sovereign the Emperor has honored us . 
But to judge what is best -- conscription or the militia -- we can leave to the supreme authority ... '' Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement . 
He hardened his heart against the senator who was introducing this set and narrow attitude into the deliberations of the nobility . 
Pierre stepped forward and interrupted him . 
He himself did not yet know what he would say , but he began to speak eagerly , occasionally lapsing into French or expressing himself in bookish Russian . 
`` Excuse me , your excellency , '' he began . 
-LRB- He was well acquainted with the senator , but thought it necessary on this occasion to address him formally . -RRB- 
`` Though I do n't agree with the gentleman ... '' -LRB- he hesitated : he wished to say , `` Mon tres honorable preopinant '' -- `` My very honorable opponent '' -RRB- `` with the gentleman ... whom I have not the honor of knowing , I suppose that the nobility have been summoned not merely to express their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to consider the means by which we can assist our Fatherland ! 
I imagine , '' he went on , warming to his subject , `` that the Emperor himself would not be satisfied to find in us merely owners of serfs whom we are willing to devote to his service , and chair a canon * we are ready to make of ourselves -- and not to obtain from us any co-co-counsel . '' 
* `` Food for cannon . '' 
Many persons withdrew from the circle , noticing the senator 's sarcastic smile and the freedom of Pierre 's remarks . 
Only Count Rostov was pleased with them as he had been pleased with those of the naval officer , the senator , and in general with whatever speech he had last heard . 
`` I think that before discussing these questions , '' Pierre continued , `` we should ask the Emperor -- most respectfully ask His Majesty -- to let us know the number of our troops and the position in which our army and our forces now are , and then ... '' But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attacked from three sides . 
The most vigorous attack came from an old acquaintance , a boston player who had always been well disposed toward him , Stepan Stepanovich Adraksin . 
Adraksin was in uniform , and whether as a result of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre saw before him quite a different man . 
With a sudden expression of malevolence on his aged face , Adraksin shouted at Pierre : `` In the first place , I tell you we have no right to question the Emperor about that , and secondly , if the Russian nobility had that right , the Emperor could not answer such a question . 
The troops are moved according to the enemy 's movements and the number of men increases and decreases ... '' Another voice , that of a nobleman of medium height and about forty years of age , whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies ' and knew as a bad cardplayer , and who , also transformed by his uniform , came up to Pierre , interrupted Adraksin . 
`` Yes , and this is not a time for discussing , '' he continued , `` but for acting : there is war in Russia ! 
