The whole day had been hot . 
Somewhere a storm was gathering , but only a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly , sprinkling the road and the sappy leaves . 
The left side of the forest was dark in the shade , the right side glittered in the sunlight , wet and shiny and scarcely swayed by the breeze . 
Everything was in blossom , the nightingales trilled , and their voices reverberated now near , now far away . 
`` Yes , here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed , '' thought Prince Andrew . 
`` But where is it ? '' 
he again wondered , gazing at the left side of the road , and without recognizing it he looked with admiration at the very oak he sought . 
The old oak , quite transfigured , spreading out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage , stood rapt and slightly trembling in the rays of the evening sun . 
Neither gnarled fingers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them in evidence now . 
Through the hard century-old bark , even where there were no twigs , leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the old veteran could have produced . 
`` Yes , it is the same oak , '' thought Prince Andrew , and all at once he was seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal . 
All the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory . 
Austerlitz with the lofty heavens , his wife 's dead reproachful face , Pierre at the ferry , that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night , and that night itself and the moon , and ... . 
all this rushed suddenly to his mind . 
`` No , life is not over at thirty-one ! '' 
Prince Andrew suddenly decided finally and decisively . 
`` It is not enough for me to know what I have in me -- everyone must know it : Pierre , and that young girl who wanted to fly away into the sky , everyone must know me , so that my life may not be lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it , but so that it may be reflected in them all , and they and I may live in harmony ! '' 
On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg that autumn and found all sorts of reasons for this decision . 
A whole serics of sensible and logical considerations showing it to be essential for him to go to Petersburg , and even to re-enter the service , kept springing up in his mind . 
He could not now understand how he could ever even have doubted the necessity of taking an active share in life , just as a month before he had not understood how the idea of leaving the quiet country could ever enter his head . 
It now seemed clear to him that all his experience of life must be senselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and again played an active part in life . 
He did not even remember how formerly , on the strength of similar wretched logical arguments , it had seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if he now , after the lessons he had had in life , allowed himself to believe in the possibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness or love . 
Now reason suggested quite the opposite . 
After that journey to Ryazan he found the country dull ; his former pursuits no longer interested him , and often when sitting alone in his study he got up , went to the mirror , and gazed a long time at his own face . 
Then he would turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise , who with hair curled a la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame . 
She did not now say those former terrible words to him , but looked simply , merrily , and inquisitively at him . 
And Prince Andrew , crossing his arms behind him , long paced the room , now frowning , now smiling , as he reflected on those irrational , inexpressible thoughts , secret as a crime , which altered his whole life and were connected with Pierre , with fame , with the girl at the window , the oak , and woman 's beauty and love . 
And if anyone came into his room at such moments he was particularly cold , stern , and above all unpleasantly logical . 
`` My dear , '' Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say , `` little Nicholas ca n't go out today , it 's very cold . '' 
`` If it were hot , '' Prince Andrew would reply at such times very dryly to his sister , `` he could go out in his smock , but as it is cold he must wear warm clothes , which were designed for that purpose . 
That is what follows from the fact that it is cold ; and not that a child who needs fresh air should remain at home , '' he would add with extreme logic , as if punishing someone for those secret illogical emotions that stirred within him . 
At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual work dries men up . 
Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August , 1809 . 
It was the time when the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and his reforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy . 
That same August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche , injured his leg , and remained three weeks at Peterhof , receiving Speranski every day and no one else . 
At that time the two famous decrees were being prepared that so agitated society -- abolishing court ranks and introducing examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiate Assessor and State Councilor -- and not merely these but a whole state constitution , intended to change the existing order of government in Russia : legal , administrative , and financial , from the Council of State down to the district tribunals . 
Now those vague liberal dreams with which the Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne , and which he had tried to put into effect with the aid of his associates , Czartoryski , Novosiltsev , Kochubey , and Strogonov -- whom he himself in jest had called his Comite de salut public -- were taking shape and being realized . 
Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side , and Arakcheev on the military . 
Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew , as a gentleman of the chamber , presented himself at court and at a levee . 
The Emperor , though he met him twice , did not favor him with a single word . 
It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that he was antipathetic to the Emperor and that the latter disliked his face and personality generally , and in the cold , repellent glance the Emperor gave him , he now found further confirmation of this surmise . 
The courtiers explained the Emperor 's neglect of him by His Majesty 's displeasure at Bolkonski 's not having served since 1805 . 
`` I know myself that one can not help one 's sympathies and antipathies , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` so it will not do to present my proposal for the reform of the army regulations to the Emperor personally , but the project will speak for itself . '' 
He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal , a friend of his father 's . 
The field marshal made an appointment to see him , received him graciously , and promised to inform the Emperor . 
A few days later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to see the Minister of War , Count Arakcheev . 
On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev 's waiting room at nine in the morning . 
He did not know Arakcheev personally , had never seen him , and all he had heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man . 
`` He is Minister of War , a man trusted by the Emperor , and I need not concern myself about his personal qualities : he has been commissioned to consider my project , so he alone can get it adopted , '' thought Prince Andrew as he waited among a number of important and unimportant people in Count Arakcheev 's waiting room . 
During his service , chiefly as an adjutant , Prince Andrew had seen the anterooms of many important men , and the different types of such rooms were well known to him . 
Count Arakcheev 's anteroom had quite a special character . 
The faces of the unimportant people awaiting their turn for an audience showed embarrassment and servility ; the faces of those of higher rank expressed a common feeling of awkwardness , covered by a mask of unconcern and ridicule of themselves , their situation , and the person for whom they were waiting . 
Some walked thoughtfully up and down , others whispered and laughed . 
Prince Andrew heard the nickname `` Sila Andreevich '' and the words , `` Uncle will give it to us hot , '' in reference to Count Arakcheev . 
One general -LRB- an important personage -RRB- , evidently feeling offended at having to wait so long , sat crossing and uncrossing his legs and smiling contemptuously to himself . 
But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on all faces -- that of fear . 
Prince Andrew for the second time asked the adjutant on duty to take in his name , but received an ironical look and was told that his turn would come in due course . 
After some others had been shown in and out of the minister 's room by the adjutant on duty , an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated and frightened air was admitted at that terrible door . 
This officer 's audience lasted a long time . 
Then suddenly the grating sound of a harsh voice was heard from the other side of the door , and the officer -- with pale face and trembling lips -- came out and passed through the waiting room , clutching his head . 
After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officer on duty said in a whisper , `` To the right , at the window . '' 
Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a man of forty with a long waist , a long closely cropped head , deep wrinkles , scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and an overhanging red nose . 
Arakcheev turned his head toward him without looking at him . 
`` What is your petition ? '' 
asked Arakcheev . 
`` I am not petitioning , your excellency , '' returned Prince Andrew quietly . 
Arakcheev 's eyes turned toward him . 
`` Sit down , '' said he . 
`` Prince Bolkonski ? '' 
`` I am not petitioning about anything . 
His Majesty the Emperor has deigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me ... '' `` You see , my dear sir , I have read your project , '' interrupted Arakcheev , uttering only the first words amiably and then -- again without looking at Prince Andrew -- relapsing gradually into a tone of grumbling contempt . 
`` You are proposing new military laws ? 
There are many laws but no one to carry out the old ones . 
Nowadays everybody designs laws , it is easier writing than doing . '' 
`` I came at His Majesty the Emperor 's wish to learn from your excellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I have presented , '' said Prince Andrew politely . 
`` I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it to the committee . 
I do not approve of it , '' said Arakcheev , rising and taking a paper from his writing table . 
`` Here ! '' 
and he handed it to Prince Andrew . 
Across the paper was scrawled in pencil , without capital letters , misspelled , and without punctuation : `` Unsoundly constructed because resembles an imitation of the French military code and from the Articles of War needlessly deviating . '' 
`` To what committee has the memorandum been referred ? '' 
inquired Prince Andrew . 
`` To the Committee on Army Regulations , and I have recommended that your honor should be appointed a member , but without a salary . '' 
Prince Andrew smiled . 
`` I do n't want one . '' 
`` A member without salary , '' repeated Arakcheev . 
`` I have the honor ... Eh ! 
Call the next one ! 
Who else is there ? '' 
he shouted , bowing to Prince Andrew . 
While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances , particularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need . 
In Petersburg he now experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle , when troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling circles where the future , on which the fate of millions depended , was being shaped . 
From the irritation of the older men , the curiosity of the uninitiated , the reserve of the initiated , the hurry and preoccupation of everyone , and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose existence he learned every day , he felt that now , in 1809 , here in Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation , the commander in chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know , but who was supposed to be a man of genius -- Speranski . 
And this movement of reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea , and Speranski its chief promoter , began to interest him so keenly that the question of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his consciousness . 
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day . 
The reforming party cordially welcomed and courted him , the first place because he was reputed to be clever and very well read , and secondly because by liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal . 
The party of the old and dissatisfied , who censured the innovations , turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the reforms , simply because he was the son of his father . 
The feminine society world welcomed him gladly , because he was rich , distinguished , a good match , and almost a newcomer , with a halo of romance on account of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife . 
Besides this the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had greatly improved during these last five years , having softened and grown more manly , lost his former affectation , pride , and contemptuous irony , and acquired the serenity that comes with years . 
People talked about him , were interested in him , and wanted to meet him . 
