`` Back ! '' 
cried Simon to a borzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood . 
The count started and dropped the snuffbox . 
Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up . 
The count and Simon were looking at him . 
Then , unexpectedly , as often happens , the sound of the hunt suddenly approached , as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing were just in front of them . 
The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyes starting out of his head , raising his cap and pointing before him to the other side . 
`` Look out ! '' 
he shouted , in a voice plainly showing that he had long fretted to utter that word , and letting the borzois slip he galloped toward the count . 
The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left a wolf which , softly swaying from side to side , was coming at a quiet lope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing . 
The angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past the horses ' feet at the wolf . 
The wolf paused , turned its heavy forehead toward the dogs awkwardly , like a man suffering from the quinsy , and , still slightly swaying from side to side , gave a couple of leaps and with a swish of its tail disappeared into the skirt of the wood . 
At the same instant , with a cry like a wail , first one hound , then another , and then another , sprang helter-skelter from the wood opposite and the whole pack rushed across the field toward the very spot where the wolf had disappeared . 
The hazel bushes parted behind the hounds and Daniel 's chestnut horse appeared , dark with sweat . 
On its long back sat Daniel , hunched forward , capless , his disheveled gray hair hanging over his flushed , perspiring face . 
`` Ulyulyulyu ! 
ulyulyu ! 
... '' he cried . 
When he caught sight of the count his eyes flashed lightning . 
`` Blast you ! '' 
he shouted , holding up his whip threateningly at the count . 
`` You 've let the wolf go ! 
... What sportsmen ! '' 
and as if scorning to say more to the frightened and shamefaced count , he lashed the heaving flanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the count had aroused and flew off after the hounds . 
The count , like a punished schoolboy , looked round , trying by a smile to win Simon 's sympathy for his plight . 
But Simon was no longer there . 
He was galloping round by the bushes while the field was coming up on both sides , all trying to head the wolf , but it vanished into the wood before they could do so . 
Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post , waiting for the wolf . 
By the way the hunt approached and receded , by the cries of the dogs whose notes were familiar to him , by the way the voices of the huntsmen approached , receded , and rose , he realized what was happening at the copse . 
He knew that young and old wolves were there , that the hounds had separated into two packs , that somewhere a wolf was being chased , and that something had gone wrong . 
He expected the wolf to come his way any moment . 
He made thousands of different conjectures as to where and from what side the beast would come and how he would set upon it . 
Hope alternated with despair . 
Several times he addressed a prayer to God that the wolf should come his way . 
He prayed with that passionate and shame-faced feeling with which men pray at moments of great excitement arising from trivial causes . 
`` What would it be to Thee to do this for me ? '' 
he said to God . 
`` I know Thou art great , and that it is a sin to ask this of Thee , but for God 's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let Karay spring at it -- in sight of ` Uncle ' who is watching from over there -- and seize it by the throat in a death grip ! '' 
A thousand times during that half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the edge of the wood , with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowth and the gully with its water-worn side and `` Uncle 's '' cap just visible above the bush on his right . 
`` No , I sha n't have such luck , '' thought Rostov , `` yet what would n't it be worth ! 
It is not to be ! 
Everywhere , at cards and in war , I am always unlucky . '' 
Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashed rapidly and clearly through his mind . 
`` Only once in my life to get an old wolf , I want only that ! '' 
thought he , straining eyes and ears and looking to the left and then to the right and listening to the slightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs . 
Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward him across the deserted field . 
`` No , it ca n't be ! '' 
thought Rostov , taking a deep breath , as a man does at the coming of something long hoped for . 
The height of happiness was reached -- and so simply , without warning , or noise , or display , that Rostov could not believe his eyes and remained in doubt for over a second . 
The wolf ran forward and jumped heavily over a gully that lay in her path . 
She was an old animal with a gray back and big reddish belly . 
She ran without hurry , evidently feeling sure that no one saw her . 
Rostov , holding his breath , looked round at the borzois . 
They stood or lay not seeing the wolf or understanding the situation . 
Old Karay had turned his head and was angrily searching for fleas , baring his yellow teeth and snapping at his hind legs . 
`` Ulyulyulyu ! '' 
whispered Rostov , pouting his lips . 
The borzois jumped up , jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears . 
Karay finished scratching his hindquarters and , cocking his ears , got up with quivering tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down . 
`` Shall I loose them or not ? '' 
Nicholas asked himself as the wolf approached him coming from the copse . 
Suddenly the wolf 's whole physiognomy changed : she shuddered , seeing what she had probably never seen before -- human eyes fixed upon her -- and turning her head a little toward Rostov , she paused . 
`` Back or forward ? 
Eh , no matter , forward ... '' the wolf seemed to say to herself , and she moved forward without again looking round and with a quiet , long , easy yet resolute lope . 
`` Ulyulyu ! '' 
cried Nicholas , in a voice not his own , and of its own accord his good horse darted headlong downhill , leaping over gullies to head off the wolf , and the borzois passed it , running faster still . 
Nicholas did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping , nor see the borzois , nor the ground over which he went : he saw only the wolf , who , increasing her speed , bounded on in the same direction along the hollow . 
The first to come into view was Milka , with her black markings and powerful quarters , gaining upon the wolf . 
Nearer and nearer ... now she was ahead of it ; but the wolf turned its head to face her , and instead of putting on speed as she usually did Milka suddenly raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs . 
`` Ulyulyulyulyu ! '' 
shouted Nicholas . 
The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka , sprang impetuously at the wolf , and seized it by its hindquarters , but immediately jumped aside in terror . 
The wolf crouched , gnashed her teeth , and again rose and bounded forward , followed at the distance of a couple of feet by all the borzois , who did not get any closer to her . 
`` She 'll get away ! 
No , it 's impossible ! '' 
thought Nicholas , still shouting with a hoarse voice . 
`` Karay , ulyulyu ! 
... '' he shouted , looking round for the old borzoi who was now his only hope . 
Karay , with all the strength age had left him , stretched himself to the utmost and , watching the wolf , galloped heavily aside to intercept it . 
But the quickness of the wolf 's lope and the borzoi 's slower pace made it plain that Karay had miscalculated . 
Nicholas could already see not far in front of him the wood where the wolf would certainly escape should she reach it . 
But , coming toward him , he saw hounds and a huntsman galloping almost straight at the wolf . 
There was still hope . 
A long , yellowish young borzoi , one Nicholas did not know , from another leash , rushed impetuously at the wolf from in front and almost knocked her over . 
But the wolf jumped up more quickly than anyone could have expected and , gnashing her teeth , flew at the yellowish borzoi , which , with a piercing yelp , fell with its head on the ground , bleeding from a gash in its side . 
`` Karay ? 
Old fellow ! 
... '' wailed Nicholas . 
Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf 's path , the old dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was within five paces of it . 
As if aware of her danger , the wolf turned her eyes on Karay , tucked her tail yet further between her legs , and increased her speed . 
But here Nicholas only saw that something happened to Karay -- the borzoi was suddenly on the wolf , and they rolled together down into a gully just in front of them . 
That instant , when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gully with the dogs , while from under them could be seen her gray hair and outstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head , with her ears laid back -LRB- Karay was pinning her by the throat -RRB- , was the happiest moment of his life . 
With his hand on his saddlebow , he was ready to dismount and stab the wolf , when she suddenly thrust her head up from among that mass of dogs , and then her forepaws were on the edge of the gully . 
She clicked her teeth -LRB- Karay no longer had her by the throat -RRB- , leaped with a movement of her hind legs out of the gully , and having disengaged herself from the dogs , with tail tucked in again , went forward . 
Karay , his hair bristling , and probably bruised or wounded , climbed with difficulty out of the gully . 
`` Oh my God ! 
Why ? '' 
Nicholas cried in despair . 
`` Uncle 's '' huntsman was galloping from the other side across the wolf 's path and his borzois once more stopped the animal 's advance . 
She was again hemmed in . 
