I only pray God that something may happen to me such as happened to Plutarch 's men , and I will act as they did . 
I will do better . 
Everyone shall know me , love me , and be delighted with me ! '' 
And suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and he began to cry . 
`` Are you ill ? '' 
he heard Dessalles ' voice asking . 
`` No , '' answered Nicholas , and lay back on his pillow . 
`` He is good and kind and I am fond of him ! '' 
he thought of Dessalles . 
`` But Uncle Pierre ! 
Oh , what a wonderful man he is ! 
And my father ? 
Oh , Father , Father ! 
Yes , I will do something with which even he would be satisfied ... '' SECOND EPILOGUE History is the life of nations and of humanity . 
To seize and put into words , to describe directly the life of humanity or even of a single nation , appears impossible . 
The ancient historians all employed one and the same method to describe and seize the apparently elusive -- the life of a people . 
They described the activity of individuals who ruled the people , and regarded the activity of those men as representing the activity of the whole nation . 
The question : how did individuals make nations act as they wished and by what was the will of these individuals themselves guided ? 
the ancients met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nations to the will of a chosen man , and guided the will of that chosen man so as to accomplish ends that were predestined . 
For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in the direct participation of the Deity in human affairs . 
Modern history , in theory , rejects both these principles . 
It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man 's subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations are led , modern history should study not the manifestations of power but the causes that produce it . 
But modern history has not done this . 
Having in theory rejected the view held by the ancients , it still follows them in practice . 
Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by the will of God , modern history has given us either heroes endowed with extraordinary , superhuman capacities , or simply men of very various kinds , from monarchs to journalists , who lead the masses . 
Instead of the former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish , Greek , or Roman nations , which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of humanity , modern history has postulated its own aims - the welfare of the French , German , or English people , or , in its highest abstraction , the welfare and civilization of humanity in general , by which is usually meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a large continent . 
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without replacing them by a new conception , and the logic of the situation has obliged the historians , after they had apparently rejected the divine authority of the kings and the `` fate '' of the ancients , to reach the same conclusion by another road , that is , to recognize -LRB- 1 -RRB- nations guided by individual men , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the existence of a known aim to which these nations and humanity at large are tending . 
At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to Buckle , despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of their outlooks , lie those two old , unavoidable assumptions . 
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals who in his opinion have directed humanity -LRB- one historian considers only monarchs , generals , and ministers as being such men , while another includes also orators , learned men , reformers , philosophers , and poets -RRB- . 
Secondly , it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led is known to the historians : to one of them this goal is the greatness of the Roman , Spanish , or French realm ; to another it is liberty , equality , and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called Europe . 
In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris ; it grows , spreads , and is expressed by a movement of peoples from west to east . 
Several times it moves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the east westward . 
In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit , Moscow , and then , with remarkable symmetry , a countermovement occurs from east to west , attracting to it , as the first movement had done , the nations of middle Europe . 
The counter movement reaches the starting point of the first movement in the west -- Paris -- and subsides . 
During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were left untilled , houses were burned , trade changed its direction , millions of men migrated , were impoverished , or were enriched , and millions of Christian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew one another . 
What does all this mean ? 
Why did it happen ? 
What made those people burn houses and slay their fellow men ? 
What were the causes of these events ? 
What force made men act so ? 
These are the instinctive , plain , and most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when it encounters the monuments and tradition of that period . 
For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turns to the science of history , whose aim is to enable nations and humanity to know themselves . 
If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would have said that God , to reward or punish his people , gave Napoleon power and directed his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends , and that reply , would have been clear and complete . 
One might believe or disbelieve in the divine significance of Napoleon , but for anyone believing in it there would have been nothing unintelligible in the history of that period , nor would there have been any contradictions . 
But modern history can not give that reply . 
Science does not admit the conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of the Deity in human affairs , and therefore history ought to give other answers . 
Modern history replying to these questions says : you want to know what this movement means , what caused it , and what force produced these events ? 
Then listen : `` Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man ; he had such and such mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled France badly . 
His descendants were weak men and they too ruled France badly . 
And they had such and such favorites and such and such mistresses . 
Moreover , certain men wrote some books at that time . 
At the end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen men in Paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal . 
This caused people all over France to begin to slash at and drown one another . 
They killed the king and many other people . 
At that time there was in France a man of genius -- Napoleon . 
He conquered everybody everywhere -- that is , he killed many people because he was a great genius . 
And for some reason he went to kill Africans , and killed them so well and was so cunning and wise that when he returned to France he ordered everybody to obey him , and they all obeyed him . 
Having become an Emperor he again went out to kill people in Italy , Austria , and Prussia . 
And there too he killed a great many . 
In Russia there was an Emperor , Alexander , who decided to restore order in Europe and therefore fought against Napoleon . 
In 1807 he suddenly made friends with him , but in 1811 they again quarreled and again began killing many people . 
Napoleon led six hundred thousand men into Russia and captured Moscow ; then he suddenly ran away from Moscow , and the Emperor Alexander , helped by the advice of Stein and others , united Europe to arm against the disturber of its peace . 
All Napoleon 's allies suddenly became his enemies and their forces advanced against the fresh forces he raised . 
The Allies defeated Napoleon , entered Paris , forced Napoleon to abdicate , and sent him to the island of Elba , not depriving him of the title of Emperor and showing him every respect , though five years before and one year later they all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand . 
Then Louis XVIII , who till then had been the laughingstock both of the French and the Allies , began to reign . 
And Napoleon , shedding tears before his Old Guards , renounced the throne and went into exile . 
Then the skillful statesmen and diplomatists -LRB- especially Talleyrand , who managed to sit down in a particular chair before anyone else and thereby extended the frontiers of France -RRB- talked in Vienna and by these conversations made the nations happy or unhappy . 
Suddenly the diplomatists and monarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of again ordering their armies to kill one another , but just then Napoleon arrived in France with a battalion , and the French , who had been hating him , immediately all submitted to him . 
But the Allied monarchs were angry at this and went to fight the French once more . 
And they defeated the genius Napoleon and , suddenly recognizing him as a brigand , sent him to the island of St. Helena . 
And the exile , separated from the beloved France so dear to his heart , died a lingering death on that rock and bequeathed his great deeds to posterity . 
But in Europe a reaction occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppress their subjects . '' 
It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic -- a caricature of the historical accounts . 
On the contrary it is a very mild expression of the contradictory replies , not meeting the questions , which all the historians give , from the compilers of memoirs and the histories of separate states to the writers of general histories and the new histories of the culture of that period . 
The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the fact that modern history , like a deaf man , answers questions no one has asked . 
If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movement of humanity and of the peoples , the first question -- in the absence of a reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible -- is : what is the power that moves peoples ? 
To this , modern history laboriously replies either that Napoleon was a great genius , or that Louis XIV was very proud , or that certain writers wrote certain books . 
All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it , but it is not what was asked . 
All that would be interesting if we recognized a divine power based on itself and always consistently directing its nations through Napoleons , Louis-es , and writers ; but we do not acknowledge such a power , and therefore before speaking about Napoleons , Louis-es , and authors , we ought to be shown the connection existing between these men and the movement of the nations . 
If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared , it should be explained in what this new force consists , for the whole interest of history lies precisely in that force . 
History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known to everyone . 
But in spite of every desire to regard it as known , anyone reading many historical works can not help doubting whether this new force , so variously understood by the historians themselves , is really quite well known to everybody . 
What force moves the nations ? 
Biographical historians and historians of separate nations understand this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers . 
In their narration events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon , and Alexander , or in general of the persons they describe . 
The answers given by this kind of historian to the question of what force causes events to happen are satisfactory only as long as there is but one historian to each event . 
As soon as historians of different nationalities and tendencies begin to describe the same event , the replies they give immediately lose all meaning , for this force is understood by them all not only differently but often in quite contradictory ways . 
One historian says that an event was produced by Napoleon 's power , another that it was produced by Alexander 's , a third that it was due to the power of some other person . 
Besides this , historians of that kind contradict each other even in their statement as to the force on which the authority of some particular person was based . 
Thiers , a Bonapartist , says that Napoleon 's power was based on his virtue and genius . 
Lanfrey , a Republican , says it was based on his trickery and deception of the people . 
So the historians of this class , by mutually destroying one another 's positions , destroy the understanding of the force which produces events , and furnish no reply to history 's essential question . 
Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem to recognize how erroneous is the specialist historians ' view of the force which produces events . 
They do not recognize it as a power inherent in heroes and rulers , but as the resultant of a multiplicity of variously directed forces . 
In describing a war or the subjugation of a people , a general historian looks for the cause of the event not in the power of one man , but in the interaction of many persons connected with the event . 
According to this view the power of historical personages , represented as the product of many forces , can no longer , it would seem , be regarded as a force that itself produces events . 
Yet in most cases universal historians still employ the conception of power as a force that itself produces events , and treat it as their cause . 
In their exposition , an historic character is first the product of his time , and his power only the resultant of various forces , and then his power is itself a force producing events . 
Gervinus , Schlosser , and others , for instance , at one time prove Napoleon to be a product of the Revolution , of the ideas of 1789 and so forth , and at another plainly say that the campaign of 1812 and other things they do not like were simply the product of Napoleon 's misdirected will , and that the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their development by Napoleon 's caprice . 
The ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of the age produced Napoleon 's power . 
