He forgot that what he was saying about Natasha could have been applied word for word to himself in relation to his wife . 
`` Yes , I have noticed that , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything , he started proving goodness knows what ! 
A pity you were not there -- what would you have said ? '' 
`` As I see it you were quite right , and I told Natasha so . 
Pierre says everybody is suffering , tortured , and being corrupted , and that it is our duty to help our neighbor . 
Of course he is right there , '' said Countess Mary , `` but he forgets that we have other duties nearer to us , duties indicated to us by God Himself , and that though we might expose ourselves to risks we must not risk our children . '' 
`` Yes , that 's it ! 
That 's just what I said to him , '' put in Nicholas , who fancied he really had said it . 
`` But they insisted on their own view : love of one 's neighbor and Christianity -- and all this in the presence of young Nicholas , who had gone into my study and broke all my things . '' 
`` Ah , Nicholas , do you know I am often troubled about little Nicholas , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` He is such an exceptional boy . 
I am afraid I neglect him in favor of my own : we all have children and relations while he has no one . 
He is constantly alone with his thoughts . '' 
`` Well , I do n't think you need reproach yourself on his account . 
All that the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and are doing for him , and of course I am glad of it . 
He is a fine lad , a fine lad ! 
This evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance , and fancy -- as we were going in to supper I looked and he had broken everything on my table to bits , and he told me of it himself at once ! 
I never knew him to tell an untruth . 
A fine lad , a fine lad ! '' 
repeated Nicholas , who at heart was not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski but was always anxious to recognize that he was a fine lad . 
`` Still , I am not the same as his own mother , '' said Countess Mary . 
`` I feel I am not the same and it troubles me . 
A wonderful boy , but I am dreadfully afraid for him . 
It would be good for him to have companions . '' 
`` Well it wo n't be for long . 
Next summer I 'll take him to Petersburg , '' said Nicholas . 
`` Yes , Pierre always was a dreamer and always will be , '' he continued , returning to the talk in the study which had evidently disturbed him . 
`` Well , what business is it of mine what goes on there -- whether Arakcheev is bad , and all that ? 
What business was it of mine when I married and was so deep in debt that I was threatened with prison , and had a mother who could not see or understand it ? 
And then there are you and the children and our affairs . 
Is it for my own pleasure that I am at the farm or in the office from morning to night ? 
No , but I know I must work to comfort my mother , to repay you , and not to leave the children such beggars as I was . '' 
Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by bread alone and that he attached too much importance to these matters . 
But she knew she must not say this and that it would be useless to do so . 
She only took his hand and kissed it . 
He took this as a sign of approval and a confirmation of his thoughts , and after a few minutes ' reflection continued to think aloud . 
`` You know , Mary , today Elias Mitrofanych '' -LRB- this was his overseer -RRB- `` came back from the Tambov estate and told me they are already offering eighty thousand rubles for the forest . '' 
And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility of repurchasing Otradnoe before long , and added : `` Another ten years of life and I shall leave the children ... in an excellent position . '' 
Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that he told her . 
She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he would sometimes ask her what he had been saying , and be vexed if he noticed that she had been thinking about something else . 
But she had to force herself to attend , for what he was saying did not interest her at all . 
She looked at him and did not think , but felt , about something different . 
She felt a submissive tender love for this man who would never understand all that she understood , and this seemed to make her love for him still stronger and added a touch of passionate tenderness . 
Besides this feeling which absorbed her altogether and hindered her from following the details of her husband 's plans , thoughts that had no connection with what he was saying flitted through her mind . 
She thought of her nephew . 
Her husband 's account of the boy 's agitation while Pierre was speaking struck her forcibly , and various traits of his gentle , sensitive character recurred to her mind ; and while thinking of her nephew she thought also of her own children . 
She did not compare them with him , but compared her feeling for them with her feeling for him , and felt with regret that there was something lacking in her feeling for young Nicholas . 
Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from the difference in their ages , but she felt herself to blame toward him and promised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible - in this life to love her husband , her children , little Nicholas , and all her neighbors , as Christ loved mankind . 
Countess Mary 's soul always strove toward the infinite , the eternal , and the absolute , and could therefore never be at peace . 
A stern expression of the lofty , secret suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on her face . 
Nicholas gazed at her . 
`` O God ! 
What will become of us if she dies , as I always fear when her face is like that ? '' 
thought he , and placing himself before the icon he began to say his evening prayers . 
Natasha and Pierre , left alone , also began to talk as only a husband and wife can talk , that is , with extraordinary clearness and rapidity , understanding and expressing each other 's thoughts in ways contrary to all rules of logic , without premises , deductions , or conclusions , and in a quite peculiar way . 
Natasha was so used to this kind of talk with her husband that for her it was the surest sign of something being wrong between them if Pierre followed a line of logical reasoning . 
When he began proving anything , or talking argumentatively and calmly and she , led on by his example , began to do the same , she knew that they were on the verge of a quarrel . 
From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him with wide-open happy eyes , and quickly seizing his head pressed it to her bosom , saying : `` Now you are all mine , mine ! 
You wo n't escape ! '' 
-- from that moment this conversation began , contrary to all the laws of logic and contrary to them because quite different subjects were talked about at one and the same time . 
This simultaneous discussion of many topics did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary was the surest sign that they fully understood one another . 
Just as in a dream when all is uncertain , unreasoning , and contradictory , except the feeling that guides the dream , so in this intercourse contrary to all laws of reason , the words themselves were not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that prompted them . 
Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother 's life and doings , of how she had suffered and lacked life during his own absence , and of how she was fonder than ever of Mary , and how Mary was in every way better than herself . 
In saying this Natasha was sincere in acknowledging Mary 's superiority , but at the same time by saying it she made a demand on Pierre that he should , all the same , prefer her to Mary and to all other women , and that now , especially after having seen many women in Petersburg , he should tell her so afresh . 
Pierre , answering Natasha 's words , told her how intolerable it had been for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg . 
`` I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies , '' he said . 
`` It was simply dull . 
Besides , I was very busy . '' 
Natasha looked intently at him and went on : `` Mary is so splendid , '' she said . 
`` How she understands children ! 
It is as if she saw straight into their souls . 
Yesterday , for instance , Mitya was naughty ... '' `` How like his father he is , '' Pierre interjected . 
Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya 's likeness to Nicholas : the recollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant and he wanted to know what Natasha thought of it . 
`` Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything not generally accepted . 
But I understand that you value what opens up a fresh line , '' said she , repeating words Pierre had once uttered . 
`` No , the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions are an amusement -- almost a pastime , '' said Pierre . 
`` For instance , he is collecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book till he has read what he had already bought -- Sismondi and Rousseau and Montesquieu , '' he added with a smile . 
`` You know how much I. . . '' 
he began to soften down what he had said ; but Natasha interrupted him to show that this was unnecessary . 
`` So you say ideas are an amusement to him ... '' `` Yes , and for me nothing else is serious . 
All the time in Petersburg I saw everyone as in a dream . 
When I am taken up by a thought , all else is mere amusement . '' 
`` Ah , I 'm so sorry I was n't there when you met the children , '' said Natasha . 
`` Which was most delighted ? 
Lisa , I 'm sure . '' 
`` Yes , '' Pierre replied , and went on with what was in his mind . 
`` Nicholas says we ought not to think . 
But I ca n't help it . 
Besides , when I was in Petersburg I felt -LRB- I can this to you -RRB- that the whole affair would go to pieces without me -- everyone was pulling his own way . 
But I succeeded in uniting them all ; and then my idea is so clear and simple . 
You see , I do n't say that we ought to oppose this and that . 
We may be mistaken . 
What I say is : ` Join hands , you who love the right , and let there be but one banner -- that of active virtue . ' 
Prince Sergey is a fine fellow and clever . '' 
Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre 's idea , but one thing disconcerted her . 
`` Can a man so important and necessary to society be also my husband ? 
How did this happen ? '' 
She wished to express this doubt to him . 
`` Now who could decide whether he is really cleverer than all the others ? '' 
