`` Vous voyez le malheureux Mack , '' he uttered in a broken voice . 
Kutuzov 's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectly immobile for a few moments . 
Then wrinkles ran over his face like a wave and his forehead became smooth again , he bowed his head respectfully , closed his eyes , silently let Mack enter his room before him , and closed the door himself behind him . 
The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had been beaten and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to be correct . 
Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in various directions with orders which showed that the Russian troops , who had hitherto been inactive , would also soon have to meet the enemy . 
Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chief interest lay in the general progress of the war . 
When he saw Mack and heard the details of his disaster he understood that half the campaign was lost , understood all the difficulties of the Russian army 's position , and vividly imagined what awaited it and the part he would have to play . 
Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at the thought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week 's time he might , perhaps , see and take part in the first Russian encounter with the French since Suvorov met them . 
He feared that Bonaparte 's genius might outweigh all the courage of the Russian troops , and at the same time could not admit the idea of his hero being disgraced . 
Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went toward his room to write to his father , to whom he wrote every day . 
In the corridor he met Nesvitski , with whom he shared a room , and the wag Zherkov ; they were as usual laughing . 
`` Why are you so glum ? '' 
asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew 's pale face and glittering eyes . 
`` There 's nothing to be gay about , '' answered Bolkonski . 
Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov , there came toward them from the other end of the corridor , Strauch , an Austrian general who on Kutuzov 's staff in charge of the provisioning of the Russian army , and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the previous evening . 
There was room enough in the wide corridor for the generals to pass the three officers quite easily , but Zherkov , pushing Nesvitski aside with his arm , said in a breathless voice , `` They 're coming ! 
... they 're coming ! 
... Stand aside , make way , please make way ! '' 
The generals were passing by , looking as if they wished to avoid embarrassing attentions . 
On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenly appeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress . 
`` Your excellency , '' said he in German , stepping forward and addressing the Austrian general , `` I have the honor to congratulate you . '' 
He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then with the other , awkwardly , like a child at a dancing lesson . 
The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but , seeing the seriousness of his stupid smile , could not but give him a moment 's attention . 
He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening . 
`` I have the honor to congratulate you . 
General Mack has arrived , quite well , only a little bruised just here , '' he added , pointing with a beaming smile to his head . 
The general frowned , turned away , and went on . 
`` Gott , wie naiv ! '' 
* said he angrily , after he had gone a few steps . 
* `` Good God , what simplicity ! '' 
Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew , but Bolkonski , turning still paler , pushed him away with an angry look and turned to Zherkov . 
The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance of Mack , the news of his defeat , and the thought of what lay before the Russian army found vent in anger at Zherkov 's untimely jest . 
`` If you , sir , choose to make a buffoon of yourself , '' he said sharply , with a slight trembling of the lower jaw , `` I ca n't prevent your doing so ; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool in my presence , I will teach you to behave yourself . '' 
Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that they gazed at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
I only congratulated them , '' said Zherkov . 
`` I am not jesting with you ; please be silent ! '' 
cried Bolkonski , and taking Nesvitski 's arm he left Zherkov , who did not know what to say . 
`` Come , what 's the matter , old fellow ? '' 
said Nesvitski trying to soothe him . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in his excitement . 
`` Do n't you understand that either we are officers serving our Tsar and our country , rejoicing in the successes and grieving at the misfortunes of our common cause , or we are merely lackeys who care nothing for their master 's business . 
Quarante mille hommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies detruite , et vous trouvez la le mot pour rire , '' * he said , as if strengthening his views by this French sentence . 
`` C'est bien pour un garcon de rein comme cet individu dont vous avez fait un ami , mais pas pour vous , pas pour vous . 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way , '' he added in Russian -- but pronouncing the word with a French accent - having noticed that Zherkov could still hear him . 
* `` Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed , and you find that a cause for jesting ! '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow of whom you have made a friend , but not for you , not for you . '' 
He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer , but he turned and went out of the corridor . 
The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau . 
The squadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered in the German village of Salzeneck . 
The best quarters in the village were assigned to cavalry-captain Denisov , the squadron commander , known throughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov . 
Cadet Rostov , ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland , had lived with the squadron commander . 
On October 11 , the day when all was astir at headquarters over the news of Mack 's defeat , the camp life of the officers of this squadron was proceeding as usual . 
Denisov , who had been losing at cards all night , had not yet come home when Rostov rode back early in the morning from a foraging expedition . 
Rostov in his cadet uniform , with a jerk to his horse , rode up to the porch , swung his leg over the saddle with a supple youthful movement , stood for a moment in the stirrup as if loathe to part from his horse , and at last sprang down and called to his orderly . 
`` Ah , Bondarenko , dear friend ! '' 
said he to the hussar who rushed up headlong to the horse . 
`` Walk him up and down , my dear fellow , '' he continued , with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodhearted young people show to everyone when they are happy . 
`` Yes , your excellency , '' answered the Ukrainian gaily , tossing his head . 
`` Mind , walk him up and down well ! '' 
Another hussar also rushed toward the horse , but Bondarenko had already thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse 's head . 
It was evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and that it paid to serve him . 
Rostov patted the horse 's neck and then his flank , and lingered for a moment . 
`` Splendid ! 
What a horse he will be ! '' 
he thought with a smile , and holding up his saber , his spurs jingling , he ran up the steps of the porch . 
His landlord , who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap , pitchfork in hand , was clearing manure from the cowhouse , looked out , and his face immediately brightened on seeing Rostov . 
`` Schon gut Morgen ! 
Schon gut Morgen ! '' 
* he said winking with a merry smile , evidently pleased to greet the young man . 
* `` A very good morning ! 
A very good morning ! '' 
`` Schon fleissig ? '' 
* said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smile which did not leave his eager face . 
`` Hoch Oestreicher ! 
Hoch Russen ! 
Kaiser Alexander hoch ! '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- said he , quoting words often repeated by the German landlord . 
* `` Busy already ? '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` Hurrah for the Austrians ! 
Hurrah for the Russians ! 
Hurrah for Emperor Alexander ! '' 
The German laughed , came out of the cowshed , pulled off his cap , and waving it above his head cried : `` Und die ganze Welt hoch ! '' 
* * `` And hurrah for the whole world ! '' 
Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and cried laughing , `` Und vivat die ganze Welt ! '' 
Though neither the German cleaning his cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foraging for hay had any reason for rejoicing , they looked at each other with joyful delight and brotherly love , wagged their heads in token of their mutual affection , and parted smiling , the German returning to his cowshed and Rostov going to the cottage he occupied with Denisov . 
`` What about your master ? '' 
he asked Lavrushka , Denisov 's orderly , whom all the regiment knew for a rogue . 
`` Has n't been in since the evening . 
Must have been losing , '' answered Lavrushka . 
`` I know by now , if he wins he comes back early to brag about it , but if he stays out till morning it means he 's lost and will come back in a rage . 
Will you have coffee ? '' 
`` Yes , bring some . '' 
Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee . 
`` He 's coming ! '' 
said he . 
`` Now for trouble ! '' 
Rostov looked out of the window and saw Denisov coming home . 
Denisov was a small man with a red face , sparkling black eyes , and black tousled mustache and hair . 
