At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for a whole day . 
Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry , one of which was occupied by Prince Andrew . 
The wounded man was much better that day and Natasha was sitting with him . 
In the next room sat the count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior , who was calling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery . 
Sonya was there too , tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrew and Natasha were talking about . 
She heard the sound of their voices through the door . 
That door opened and Natasha came out , looking excited . 
Not noticing the monk , who had risen to greet her and was drawing back the wide sleeve on his right arm , she went up to Sonya and took her hand . 
`` Natasha , what are you about ? 
Come here ! '' 
said the countess . 
Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing , and advised her to pray for aid to God and His saint . 
As soon as the prior withdrew , Natasha took her friend by the hand and went with her into the unoccupied room . 
`` Sonya , will he live ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Sonya , how happy I am , and how unhappy ! 
... Sonya , dovey , everything is as it used to be . 
If only he lives ! 
He can not ... because ... because ... of '' and Natasha burst into tears . 
`` Yes ! 
I knew it ! 
Thank God ! '' 
murmured Sonya . 
`` He will live . '' 
Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter 's fear and grief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one . 
Sobbing , she kissed and comforted Natasha . 
`` If only he lives ! '' 
she thought . 
Having wept , talked , and wiped away their tears , the two friends went together to Prince Andrew 's door . 
Natasha opened it cautiously and glanced into the room , Sonya standing beside her at the half-open door . 
Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows . 
His pale face was calm , his eyes closed , and they could see his regular breathing . 
`` O , Natasha ! '' 
Sonya suddenly almost screamed , catching her companion 's arm and stepping back from the door . 
`` What ? 
What is it ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` It 's that , that ... '' said Sonya , with a white face and trembling lips . 
Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window , not yet understanding what the latter was telling her . 
`` You remember , '' said Sonya with a solemn and frightened expression . 
`` You remember when I looked in the mirror for you ... at Otradnoe at Christmas ? 
Do you remember what I saw ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Natasha opening her eyes wide , and vaguely recalling that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whom she had seen lying down . 
`` You remember ? '' 
Sonya went on . 
`` I saw it then and told everybody , you and Dunyasha . 
I saw him lying on a bed , '' said she , making a gesture with her hand and a lifted finger at each detail , `` and that he had his eyes closed and was covered just with a pink quilt , and that his hands were folded , '' she concluded , convincing herself that the details she had just seen were exactly what she had seen in the mirror . 
She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the first thing that came into her head , but what she had invented then seemed to her now as real as any other recollection . 
She not only remembered what she had then said -- that he turned to look at her and smiled and was covered with something red -- but was firmly convinced that she had then seen and said that he was covered with a pink quilt and that his eyes were closed . 
`` Yes , yes , it really was pink ! '' 
cried Natasha , who now thought she too remembered the word pink being used , and saw in this the most extraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction . 
`` But what does it mean ? '' 
she added meditatively . 
`` Oh , I do n't know , it is all so strange , '' replied Sonya , clutching at her head . 
A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him , but Sonya , feeling unusually excited and touched , remained at the window thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred . 
They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army , and the countess was writing to her son . 
`` Sonya ! '' 
said the countess , raising her eyes from her letter as her niece passed , `` Sonya , wo n't you write to Nicholas ? '' 
She spoke in a soft , tremulous voice , and in the weary eyes that looked over her spectacles Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with these words . 
Those eyes expressed entreaty , shame at having to ask , fear of a refusal , and readiness for relentless hatred in case of such refusal . 
Sonya went up to the countess and , kneeling down , kissed her hand . 
`` Yes , Mamma , I will write , '' said she . 
Sonya was softened , excited , and touched by all that had occurred that day , especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seen of her vision . 
Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha 's relations with Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marrying Princess Mary , she was joyfully conscious of a return of that self-sacrificing spirit in which she was accustomed to live and loved to live . 
So with a joyful consciousness of performing a magnanimous deed -- interrupted several times by the tears that dimmed her velvety black eyes -- she wrote that touching letter the arrival of which had so amazed Nicholas . 
The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him with hostility but yet with respect , in the guardhouse to which he was taken . 
In their attitude toward him could still be felt both uncertainty as to who he might be -- perhaps a very important person - and hostility as a result of their recent personal conflict with him . 
But when the guard was relieved next morning , Pierre felt that for the new guard -- both officers and men -- he was not as interesting as he had been to his captors ; and in fact the guard of the second day did not recognize in this big , stout man in a peasant coat the vigorous person who had fought so desperately with the marauder and the convoy and had uttered those solemn words about saving a child ; they saw in him only No. 17 of the captured Russians , arrested and detained for some reason by order of the Higher Command . 
If they noticed anything remarkable about Pierre , it was only his unabashed , meditative concentration and thoughtfulness , and the way he spoke French , which struck them as surprisingly good . 
In spite of this he was placed that day with the other arrested suspects , as the separate room he had occupied was required by an officer . 
All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest class and , recognizing him as a gentleman , they all avoided him , more especially as he spoke French . 
Pierre felt sad at hearing them making fun of him . 
That evening he learned that all these prisoners -LRB- he , probably , among them -RRB- were to be tried for incendiarism . 
On the third day he was taken with the others to a house where a French general with a white mustache sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves on their arms . 
With the precision and definiteness customary in addressing prisoners , and which is supposed to preclude human frailty , Pierre like the others was questioned as to who he was , where he had been , with what object , and so on . 
These questions , like questions put at trials generally , left the essence of the matter aside , shut out the possibility of that essence 's being revealed , and were designed only to form a channel through which the judges wished the answers of the accused to flow so as to lead to the desired result , namely a conviction . 
As soon as Pierre began to say anything that did not fit in with that aim , the channel was removed and the water could flow to waste . 
Pierre felt , moreover , what the accused always feel at their trial , perplexity as to why these questions were put to him . 
He had a feeling that it was only out of condescension or a kind of civility that this device of placing a channel was employed . 
He knew he was in these men 's power , that only by force had they brought him there , that force alone gave them the right to demand answers to their questions , and that the sole object of that assembly was to inculpate him . 
And so , as they had the power and wish to inculpate him , this expedient of an inquiry and trial seemed unnecessary . 
It was evident that any answer would lead to conviction . 
When asked what he was doing when he was arrested , Pierre replied in a rather tragic manner that he was restoring to its parents a child he had saved from the flames . 
Why had he fought the marauder ? 
Pierre answered that he `` was protecting a woman , '' and that `` to protect a woman who was being insulted was the duty of every man ; that ... '' They interrupted him , for this was not to the point . 
Why was he in the yard of a burning house where witnesses had seen him ? 
He replied that he had gone out to see what was happening in Moscow . 
Again they interrupted him : they had not asked where he was going , but why he was found near the fire ? 
Who was he ? 
they asked , repeating their first question , which he had declined to answer . 
Again he replied that he could not answer it . 
`` Put that down , that 's bad ... very bad , '' sternly remarked the general with the white mustache and red flushed face . 
On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart . 
Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of a merchant 's house near the Crimean bridge . 
On his way through the streets Pierre felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over the whole city . 
Fires were visible on all sides . 
He did not then realize the significance of the burning of Moscow , and looked at the fires with horror . 
He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge and during that time learned , from the talk of the French soldiers , that all those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come any day from the marshal . 
What marshal this was , Pierre could not learn from the soldiers . 
