And what I have done , I have done ; but , if you like , I wo n't speak to him again . '' 
`` No , my dear boy '' -LRB- the count , too , felt embarrassed . 
He knew he had mismanaged his wife 's property and was to blame toward his children , but he did not know how to remedy it -RRB- . 
`` No , I beg you to attend to the business . 
I am old . 
I. . . '' 
`` No , Papa . 
Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness . 
I understand it all less than you do . '' 
`` Devil take all these peasants , and money matters , and carryings forward from page to page , '' he thought . 
`` I used to understand what a ` corner ' and the stakes at cards meant , but carrying forward to another page I do n't understand at all , '' said he to himself , and after that he did not meddle in business affairs . 
But once the countess called her son and informed him that she had a promissory note from Anna Mikhaylovna for two thousand rubles , and asked him what he thought of doing with it . 
`` This , '' answered Nicholas . 
`` You say it rests with me . 
Well , I do n't like Anna Mikhaylovna and I do n't like Boris , but they were our friends and poor . 
Well then , this ! '' 
and he tore up the note , and by so doing caused the old countess to weep tears of joy . 
After that , young Rostov took no further part in any business affairs , but devoted himself with passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a new pursuit -- the chase -- for which his father kept a large establishment . 
The weather was already growing wintry and morning frosts congealed an earth saturated by autumn rains . 
The verdure had thickened and its bright green stood out sharply against the brownish strips of winter rye trodden down by the cattle , and against the pale-yellow stubble of the spring buckwheat . 
The wooded ravines and the copses , which at the end of August had still been green islands amid black fields and stubble , had become golden and bright-red islands amid the green winter rye . 
The hares had already half changed their summer coats , the fox cubs were beginning to scatter , and the young wolves were bigger than dogs . 
It was the best time of the year for the chase . 
The hounds of that ardent young sportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition , but were so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to give them a three days ' rest and then , on the sixteenth of September , to go on a distant expedition , starting from the oak grove where there was an undisturbed litter of wolf cubs . 
All that day the hounds remained at home . 
It was frosty and the air was sharp , but toward evening the sky became overcast and it began to thaw . 
On the fifteenth , when young Rostov , in his dressing gown , looked out of the window , he saw it was an unsurpassable morning for hunting : it was as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earth without any wind . 
The only motion in the air was that of the dripping , microscopic particles of drizzling mist . 
The bare twigs in the garden were hung with transparent drops which fell on the freshly fallen leaves . 
The earth in the kitchen garden looked wet and black and glistened like poppy seed and at a short distance merged into the dull , moist veil of mist . 
Nicholas went out into the wet and muddy porch . 
There was a smell of decaying leaves and of dog . 
Milka , a black-spotted , broad-haunched bitch with prominent black eyes , got up on seeing her master , stretched her hind legs , lay down like a hare , and then suddenly jumped up and licked him right on his nose and mustache . 
Another borzoi , a dog , catching sight of his master from the garden path , arched his back and , rushing headlong toward the porch with lifted tail , began rubbing himself against his legs . 
`` O-hoy ! '' 
came at that moment , that inimitable huntsman 's call which unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor , and round the corner came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman , a gray , wrinkled old man with hair cut straight over his forehead , Ukrainian fashion , a long bent whip in his hand , and that look of independence and scorn of everything that is only seen in huntsmen . 
He doffed his Circassian cap to his master and looked at him scornfully . 
This scorn was not offensive to his master . 
Nicholas knew that this Daniel , disdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them , was all the same his serf and huntsman . 
`` Daniel ! '' 
Nicholas said timidly , conscious at the sight of the weather , the hounds , and the huntsman that he was being carried away by that irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget all his previous resolutions , as a lover forgets in the presence of his mistress . 
`` What orders , your excellency ? '' 
said the huntsman in his deep bass , deep as a proto-deacon 's and hoarse with hallooing -- and two flashing black eyes gazed from under his brows at his master , who was silent . 
`` Can you resist it ? '' 
those eyes seemed to be asking . 
`` It 's a good day , eh ? 
For a hunt and a gallop , eh ? '' 
asked Nicholas , scratching Milka behind the ears . 
Daniel did not answer , but winked instead . 
`` I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen , '' his bass boomed out after a minute 's pause . 
`` He says she 's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure . 
They were howling there . '' 
-LRB- This meant that the she-wolf , about whom they both knew , had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse , a small place a mile and a half from the house . -RRB- 
`` We ought to go , do n't you think so ? '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` Come to me with Uvarka . '' 
`` As you please . '' 
`` Then put off feeding them . '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas ' big study . 
Though Daniel was not a big man , to see him in a room was like seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture and surroundings of human life . 
Daniel himself felt this , and as usual stood just inside the door , trying to speak softly and not move , for fear of breaking something in the master 's apartment , and he hastened to say all that was necessary so as to get from under that ceiling , out into the open under the sky once more . 
Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinion that the hounds were fit -LRB- Daniel himself wished to go hunting -RRB- , Nicholas ordered the horses to be saddled . 
But just as Daniel was about to go Natasha came in with rapid steps , not having done up her hair or finished dressing and with her old nurse 's big shawl wrapped round her . 
Petya ran in at the same time . 
`` You are going ? '' 
asked Natasha . 
`` I knew you would ! 
Sonya said you would n't go , but I knew that today is the sort of day when you could n't help going . '' 
`` Yes , we are going , '' replied Nicholas reluctantly , for today , as he intended to hunt seriously , he did not want to take Natasha and Petya . 
`` We are going , but only wolf hunting : it would be dull for you . '' 
`` You know it is my greatest pleasure , '' said Natasha . 
`` It 's not fair ; you are going by yourself , are having the horses saddled and said nothing to us about it . '' '' 
` No barrier bars a Russian 's path ' -- we 'll go ! '' 
shouted Petya . 
`` But you ca n't . 
Mamma said you must n't , '' said Nicholas to Natasha . 
`` Yes , I 'll go . 
I shall certainly go , '' said Natasha decisively . 
`` Daniel , tell them to saddle for us , and Michael must come with my dogs , '' she added to the huntsman . 
It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all , but to have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible . 
He cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of his business , careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury on the young lady . 
The old count , who had always kept up an enormous hunting establishment but had now handed it all completely over to his son 's care , being in very good spirits on this fifteenth of September , prepared to go out with the others . 
In an hour 's time the whole hunting party was at the porch . 
Nicholas , with a stern and serious air which showed that now was no time for attending to trifles , went past Natasha and Petya who were trying to tell him something . 
He had a look at all the details of the hunt , sent a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find the quarry , mounted his chestnut Donets , and whistling to his own leash of borzois , set off across the threshing ground to a field leading to the Otradnoe wood . 
The old count 's horse , a sorrel gelding called Viflyanka , was led by the groom in attendance on him , while the count himself was to drive in a small trap straight to a spot reserved for him . 
They were taking fifty-four hounds , with six hunt attendants and whippers-in . 
Besides the family , there were eight borzoi kennelmen and more than forty borzois , so that , with the borzois on the leash belonging to members of the family , there were about a hundred and thirty dogs and twenty horsemen . 
Each dog knew its master and its call . 
Each man in the hunt knew his business , his place , what he had to do . 
As soon as they had passed the fence they all spread out evenly and quietly , without noise or talk , along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert . 
The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet , now and then splashing into puddles as they crossed a road . 
The misty sky still seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth , the air was still , warm , and silent . 
Occasionally the whistle of a huntsman , the snort of a horse , the crack of a whip , or the whine of a straggling hound could be heard . 
When they had gone a little less than a mile , five more riders with dogs appeared out of the mist , approaching the Rostovs . 
In front rode a fresh-looking , handsome old man with a large gray mustache . 
`` Good morning , Uncle ! '' 
said Nicholas , when the old man drew near . 
`` That 's it . 
