`` Tit ! 
I say , Tit ! '' 
said the groom . 
`` What ? '' 
answered the old man absent-mindedly . 
`` Go , Tit ! 
Thresh a bit ! '' 
`` Oh , you fool ! '' 
said the old man , spitting angrily . 
Some time passed in silence , and then the same joke was repeated . 
Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points . 
More than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French . 
Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms . 
Other columns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderly confused masses . 
The remains of Langeron 's and Dokhturov 's mingled forces were crowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd . 
After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hot cannonade -LRB- delivered by the French alone -RRB- was still to be heard from numerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights , directed at our retreating forces . 
In the rearguard , Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions kept up a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops . 
It was growing dusk . 
On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so many years the old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled cap peacefully angling , while his grandson , with shirt sleeves rolled up , handled the floundering silvery fish in the watering can , on that dam over which for so many years Moravians in shaggy caps and blue jackets had peacefully driven their two-horse carts loaded with wheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts -- on that narrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon , under the horses ' hoofs and between the wagon wheels , men disfigured by fear of death now crowded together , crushing one another , dying , stepping over the dying and killing one another , only to move on a few steps and be killed themselves in the same way . 
Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around , or a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng , killing some and splashing with blood those near them . 
Dolokhov -- now an officer -- wounded in the arm , and on foot , with the regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company , represented all that was left of that whole regiment . 
Impelled by the crowd , they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and , jammed in on all sides , had stopped because a horse in front had fallen under a cannon and the crowd were dragging it out . 
A cannon ball killed someone behind them , another fell in front and splashed Dolokhov with blood . 
The crowd , pushing forward desperately , squeezed together , moved a few steps , and again stopped . 
`` Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved , remain here another two minutes and it is certain death , '' thought each one . 
Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to the edge of the dam , throwing two soldiers off their feet , and ran onto the slippery ice that covered the millpool . 
`` Turn this way ! '' 
he shouted , jumping over the ice which creaked under him ; `` turn this way ! '' 
he shouted to those with the gun . 
`` It bears ! 
... '' The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked , and it was plain that it would give way not only under a cannon or a crowd , but very soon even under his weight alone . 
The men looked at him and pressed to the bank , hesitating to step onto the ice . 
The general on horseback at the entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth to address Dolokhov . 
Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowd that everyone ducked . 
It flopped into something moist , and the general fell from his horse in a pool of blood . 
Nobody gave him a look or thought of raising him . 
`` Get onto the ice , over the ice ! 
Go on ! 
Turn ! 
Do n't you hear ? 
Go on ! '' 
innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck the general , the men themselves not knowing what , or why , they were shouting . 
One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off onto the ice . 
Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozen pond . 
The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers , and one leg slipped into the water . 
He tried to right himself but fell in up to his waist . 
The nearest soldiers shrank back , the gun driver stopped his horse , but from behind still came the shouts : `` Onto the ice , why do you stop ? 
Go on ! 
Go on ! '' 
And cries of horror were heard in the crowd . 
The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat the horses to make them turn and move on . 
The horses moved off the bank . 
The ice , that had held under those on foot , collapsed in a great mass , and some forty men who were on it dashed , some forward and some back , drowning one another . 
Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flop onto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowd that covered the dam , the pond , and the bank . 
On the Pratzen Heights , where he had fallen with the flagstaff in his hand , lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely and unconsciously uttering a gentle , piteous , and childlike moan . 
Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still . 
He did not know how long his unconsciousness lasted . 
Suddenly he again felt that he was alive and suffering from a burning , lacerating pain in his head . 
`` Where is it , that lofty sky that I did not know till now , but saw today ? '' 
was his first thought . 
`` And I did not know this suffering either , '' he thought . 
`` Yes , I did not know anything , anything at all till now . 
But where am I ? '' 
He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses , and voices speaking French . 
He opened his eyes . 
Above him again was the same lofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher , and between them gleamed blue infinity . 
He did not turn his head and did not see those who , judging by the sound of hoofs and voices , had ridden up and stopped near him . 
It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp . 
Bonaparte riding over the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen the batteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed and wounded left on the field . 
`` Fine men ! '' 
remarked Napoleon , looking at a dead Russian grenadier , who , with his face buried in the ground and a blackened nape , lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide . 
`` The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted , Your Majesty , '' said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that were firing at Augesd . 
`` Have some brought from the reserve , '' said Napoleon , and having gone on a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew , who lay on his back with the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him . 
-LRB- The flag had already been taken by the French as a trophy . -RRB- 
`` That 's a fine death ! '' 
said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski . 
Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it was Napoleon who said it . 
He heard the speaker addressed as Sire . 
But he heard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly . 
Not only did they not interest him , but he took no notice of them and at once forgot them . 
His head was burning , he felt himself bleeding to death , and he saw above him the remote , lofty , and everlasting sky . 
He knew it was Napoleon -- his hero -- but at that moment Napoleon seemed to him such a small , insignificant creature compared with what was passing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with the clouds flying over it . 
At that moment it meant nothing to him who might be standing over him , or what was said of him ; he was only glad that people were standing near him and only wished that they would help him and bring him back to life , which seemed to him so beautiful now that he had today learned to understand it so differently . 
He collected all his strength , to stir and utter a sound . 
He feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak , sickly groan which aroused his own pity . 
`` Ah ! 
He is alive , '' said Napoleon . 
`` Lift this young man up and carry him to the dressing station . '' 
Having said this , Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes , who , hat in hand , rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on the victory . 
Prince Andrew remembered nothing more : he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher , the jolting while being moved , and the probing of his wound at the dressing station . 
He did not regain consciousness till late in the day , when with other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to the hospital . 
During this transfer he felt a little stronger and was able to look about him and even speak . 
The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of a French convoy officer , who said rapidly : `` We must halt here : the Emperor will pass here immediately ; it will please him to see these gentlemen prisoners . '' 
`` There are so many prisoners today , nearly the whole Russian army , that he is probably tired of them , '' said another officer . 
`` All the same ! 
They say this one is the commander of all the Emperor Alexander 's Guards , '' said the first one , indicating a Russian officer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards . 
Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburg society . 
Beside him stood a lad of nineteen , also a wounded officer of the Horse Guards . 
Bonaparte , having come up at a gallop , stopped his horse . 
`` Which is the senior ? '' 
