Two or three people clapped their hands at the mention of chauvinism and mysticism . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch had been , indeed , carried away by his own eloquence . 
All this had little to do with the case in hand , to say nothing of the fact of its being somewhat vague , but the sickly and consumptive man was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life . 
People said afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticism of Ivan , because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better of him in argument , and Ippolit Kirillovitch , remembering it , tried now to take his revenge . 
But I do n't know whether it was true . 
All this was only introductory , however , and the speech passed to more direct consideration of the case . 
`` But to return to the eldest son , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch went on . 
`` He is the prisoner before us . 
We have his life and his actions , too , before us ; the fatal day has come and all has been brought to the surface . 
While his brothers seem to stand for ` Europeanism ' and ` the principles of the people , ' he seems to represent Russia as she is . 
Oh , not all Russia , not all ! 
God preserve us , if it were ! 
Yet , here we have her , our mother Russia , the very scent and sound of her . 
Oh , he is spontaneous , he is a marvellous mingling of good and evil , he is a lover of culture and Schiller , yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his boon companions . 
Oh , he , too , can be good and noble , but only when all goes well with him . 
What is more , he can be carried off his feet , positively carried off his feet by noble ideals , but only if they come of themselves , if they fall from heaven for him , if they need not be paid for . 
He dislikes paying for anything , but is very fond of receiving , and that 's so with him in everything . 
Oh , give him every possible good in life -LRB- he could n't be content with less -RRB- , and put no obstacle in his way , and he will show that he , too , can be noble . 
He is not greedy , no , but he must have money , a great deal of money , and you will see how generously , with what scorn of filthy lucre , he will fling it all away in the reckless dissipation of one night . 
But if he has not money , he will show what he is ready to do to get it when he is in great need of it . 
But all this later , let us take events in their chronological order . 
`` First , we have before us a poor abandoned child , running about the back-yard ` without boots on his feet , ' as our worthy and esteemed fellow citizen , of foreign origin , alas ! 
expressed it just now . 
I repeat it again , I yield to no one the defence of the criminal . 
I am here to accuse him , but to defend him also . 
Yes , I , too , am human ; I , too , can weigh the influence of home and childhood on the character . 
But the boy grows up and becomes an officer ; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled to one of the remote frontier towns of Russia . 
There he led a wild life as an officer . 
And , of course , he needed money , money before all things , and so after prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father , and the last six thousand was sent him . 
A letter is in existence in which he practically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict with his father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand . 
`` Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brilliant education . 
Oh , I do not venture to repeat the details ; you have only just heard them . 
Honour , self-sacrifice were shown there , and I will be silent . 
The figure of the young officer , frivolous and profligate , doing homage to true nobility and a lofty ideal , was shown in a very sympathetic light before us . 
But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to us immediately after in this very court . 
Again I will not venture to conjecture why it happened so , but there were causes . 
The same lady , bathed in tears of long-concealed indignation , alleged that he , he of all men , had despised her for her action , which , though incautious , reckless perhaps , was still dictated by lofty and generous motives . 
He , he , the girl 's betrothed , looked at her with that smile of mockery , which was more insufferable from him than from anyone . 
And knowing that he had already deceived her -LRB- he had deceived her , believing that she was bound to endure everything from him , even treachery -RRB- , she intentionally offered him three thousand roubles , and clearly , too clearly , let him understand that she was offering him money to deceive her . 
` Well , will you take it or not , are you so lost to shame ? ' 
was the dumb question in her scrutinising eyes . 
He looked at her , saw clearly what was in her mind -LRB- he 's admitted here before you that he understood it all -RRB- , appropriated that three thousand unconditionally , and squandered it in two days with the new object of his affections . 
`` What are we to believe then ? 
The first legend of the young officer sacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doing reverence to virtue , or this other revolting picture ? 
As a rule , between two extremes one has to find the mean , but in the present case this is not true . 
The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble , and in the second as genuinely base . 
And why ? 
Because he was of the broad Karamazov character - that 's just what I am leading up to - capable of combining the most incongruous contradictions , and capable of the greatest heights and of the greatest depths . 
Remember the brilliant remark made by a young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters - Mr. Rakitin : ` The sense of their own degradation is as essential to those reckless , unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity . ' 
And that 's true , they need continually this unnatural mixture . 
Two extremes at the same moment , or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete . 
They are wide , wide as mother Russia ; they include everything and put up with everything . 
`` By the way , gentlemen of the jury , we 've just touched upon that three thousand roubles , and I will venture to anticipate things a little . 
Can you conceive that a man like that , on receiving that sum and in such a way , at the price of such shame , such disgrace , such utter degradation , could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum , that very day , and sewing it up in a little bag , and would have had the firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month afterwards , in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it ! 
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns , nor when he was flying into the country , trying to get from God knows whom , the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father , did he bring himself to touch that little bag ! 
Why , if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous , he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her , and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ' I am yours , ' and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings . 
`` But no , he did not touch his talisman , and what is the reason he gives for it ? 
The chief reason , as I have just said , was that when she would say ' I am yours , take me where you will , ' he might have the wherewithal to take her . 
But that first reason , in the prisoner 's own words , was of little weight beside the second . 
While I have that money on me , he said , I am a scoundrel , not a thief , for I can always go to my insulted betrothed , and , laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated , I can always say to her , ` You see , I 've squandered half your money , and shown I am a weak and immoral man , and , if you like , a scoundrel ' -LRB- I use the prisoner 's own expressions -RRB- , ` but though I am a scoundrel , I am not a thief , for if I had been a thief , I should n't have brought you back this half of the money , but should have taken it as I did the other half ! ' 
A marvellous explanation ! 
This frantic , but weak man , who could not resist the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of such disgrace , this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness , and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it . 
Does that fit in at all with the character we have analysed ? 
No , and I venture to tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such circumstances , if he really had brought himself to put away the money . 
`` At the first temptation - for instance , to entertain the woman with whom he had already squandered half the money - he would have unpicked his little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles , for why should he have taken back precisely half the money , that is , fifteen hundred roubles ? 
Why not fourteen hundred ? 
He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief , because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles . 
Then another time he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred , and then a third , and then a fourth , and before the end of the month he would have taken the last note but one , feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the purpose , for a thief would have stolen it all . 
And then he would have looked at this last note , and have said to himself , ` It 's really not worth while to give back one hundred ; let 's spend that , too ! ' 
That 's how the real Dmitri Karamazov , as we know him , would have behaved . 
One can not imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this legend of the little bag . 
Nothing could be more inconceivable . 
But we shall return to that later . '' 
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the financial relations of father and son , and arguing again and again that it was utterly impossible , from the facts known , to determine which was in the wrong , Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical experts in reference to Mitya 's fixed idea about the three thousand owing him . 
An Historical Survey `` THE medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out of his mind and , in fact , a maniac . 
I maintain that he is in his right mind , and that if he had not been , he would have behaved more cleverly . 
As for his being a maniac , that I would agree with , but only in one point , that is , his fixed idea about the three thousand . 
Yet I think one might find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity . 
For my part I agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner 's mental faculties have always been normal , and that he has only been irritable and exasperated . 
The object of the prisoner 's continual and violent anger was not the sum itself ; there was a special motive at the bottom of it . 
That motive is jealousy ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner 's fatal passion for Grushenka . 
He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the `` young person 's '' lodgings `` to beat her '' - `` I use his own expression , '' the prosecutor explained - `` but instead of beating her , he remained there , at her feet . 
That was the beginning of the passion . 
At the same time the prisoner 's father was captivated by the same young person - a strange and fatal coincidence , for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously , though both had known her before . 
And she inspired in both of them the most violent , characteristically Karamazov passion . 
We have her own confession : ' I was laughing at both of them . ' 
Yes , the sudden desire to make a jest of them came over her , and she conquered both of them at once . 
The old man , who worshipped money , at once set aside three thousand roubles as a reward for one visit from her , but soon after that , he would have been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet , if only she would become his lawful wife . 
We have good evidence of this . 
As for the prisoner , the tragedy of his fate is evident ; it is before us . 
But such was the young person 's ` game . ' 
The enchantress gave the unhappy young man no hope until the last moment , when he knelt before her , stretching out hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival . 
It was in that position that he was arrested . 
` Send me to Siberia with him , I have brought him to this , I am most to blame , ' the woman herself cried , in genuine remorse at the moment of his arrest . 
`` The talented young man , to whom I have referred already , Mr. Rakitin , characterised this heroine in brief and impressive terms : ` She was disillusioned early in life , deceived and ruined by a betrothed , who seduced and abandoned her . 
She was left in poverty , cursed by her respectable family and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man , whom she still , however , considers as her benefactor . 
There was perhaps much that was good in her young heart , but it was embittered too early . 
She became prudent and saved money . 
She grew sarcastic and resentful against society . ' 
