Come along . '' 
Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin . 
`` If your little brother Ivan could see this would n't he be surprised ! 
By the way , your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning , did you know ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha listlessly , and suddenly the image of his brother Dmitri rose before his mind . 
But only for a minute , and though it reminded him of something that must not be put off for a moment , some duty , some terrible obligation , even that reminder made no impression on him , did not reach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten . 
But , a long while afterwards , Alyosha remembered this . 
`` Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ` liberal booby with no talents whatsoever . ' 
Once you , too , could not resist letting me know I was ` dishonourable . ' 
Well ! 
I should like to see what your talents and sense of honour will do for you now . '' 
This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in a whisper . 
`` Listen ! '' 
he said aloud , `` Let 's go by the path beyond the monastery straight to the town . 
H 'm ! 
I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov 's by the way . 
Only fancy , I 've written to tell her everything that happened , and would you believe it , she answered me instantly in pencil -LRB- the lady has a passion for writing notes -RRB- that ` she would never have expected such conduct from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima . ' 
That was her very word : ` conduct . ' 
She is angry too . 
Eh , you are a set ! 
Stay ! '' 
he cried suddenly again . 
He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by the shoulder made him stop too . 
`` Do you know , Alyosha , '' he peeped inquisitively into his eyes , absorbed in a sudden new thought which had dawned on him , and though he was laughing outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud , so difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected mood in which he now saw Alyosha . 
`` Alyosha , do you know where we had better go ? '' 
he brought out at last timidly , and insinuatingly . 
`` I do n't care ... where you like . '' 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , eh ? 
Will you come ? '' 
pronounced Rakitin at last , trembling with timid suspense . 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , '' Alyosha answered calmly , at once , and this prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost started back . 
`` Well ! 
I say ! '' 
he cried in amazement , but seizing Alyosha firmly by the arm be led him along the path , still dreading that he would change his mind . 
They walked along in silence ; Rakitin was positively afraid to talk . 
`` And how glad she will be , how delighted ! '' 
he muttered , but lapsed into silence again . 
And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking Alyosha to her . 
He was a practical person and never undertook anything without a prospect of gain for himself . 
His object in this case was twofold , first a revengeful desire to see `` the downfall of the righteous , '' and Alyosha 's fall `` from the saints to the sinners , '' over which he was already gloating in his imagination , and in the second place he had in view a certain material gain for himself , of which more will be said later . 
`` So the critical moment has come , '' he thought to himself with spiteful glee , `` and we shall catch it on the hop , for it 's just what we want . '' 
An Onion GRUSHENKA lived in the busiest part of the town , near the cathedral square , in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house of the widow Morozov . 
The house was a large stone building of two stories , old and very ugly . 
The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarried nieces , who were also elderly women . 
She had no need to let her lodge , but everyone knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger , four years before , solely to please her kinsman , the merchant Samsonov , who was known to the girl 's protector . 
It was said that the jealous old man 's object in placing his `` favourite '' with the widow Morozov was that the old woman should keep a sharp eye on her new lodger 's conduct . 
But this sharp eye soon proved to be unnecessary , and in the end the widow Morozov seldom met Grushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way . 
It is true that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim , delicate , shy , timid , dreamy , and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town of the province , and much had happened since then . 
Little was known of the girl 's history in the town and that little was vague . 
Nothing more had been learnt during the last four years , even after many persons had become interested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna had meanwhile developed . 
There were rumours that she had been at seventeen betrayed by someone , some sort of officer , and immediately afterwards abandoned by him . 
The officer had gone away and afterwards married , while Grushenka had been left in poverty and disgrace . 
It was said , however , that though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man , Samsonov , she came of a respectable family belonging to the clerical class , that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort . 
And now after four years the sensitive , injured and pathetic little orphan had become a plump , rosy beauty of the Russian type , a woman of bold and determined character , proud and insolent . 
She had a good head for business , was acquisitive , saving and careful , and by fair means or foul had succeeded , it was said , in amassing a little fortune . 
There was only , one point on which all were agreed . 
Grushenka was not easily to be approached and , except her aged protector , there had not been one man who could boast of her favours during those four years . 
It was a positive fact , for there had been a good many , especially during the last two years , who had attempted to obtain those favours . 
But all their efforts had been in vain and some of these suitors had been forced to beat an undignified and even comic retreat , owing to the firm and ironical resistance they met from the strong-willed young person . 
It was known , too , that the young person had , especially of late , been given to what is called `` speculation , '' and that she had shown marked abilities in that direction , so that many people began to say that she was no better than a Jew . 
It was not that she lent money on interest , but it was known , for instance , that she had for some time past , in partnership with old Karamazov , actually invested in the purchase of bad debts for a trifle , a tenth of their nominal value , and afterwards had made out of them ten times their value . 
The old widower Samsonov , a man of large fortune , was stingy and merciless . 
He tyrannised over his grown-up sons , but , for the last year during which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs , he had fallen greatly under the influence of his protegee , whom he had at first kept strictly and in humble surroundings , `` on Lenten fare , '' as the wits said at the time . 
But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating herself , while she established in him a boundless belief in her fidelity . 
The old man , now long since dead , had had a large business in his day and was also a noteworthy character , miserly and hard as flint . 
Though Grushenka 's hold upon him was so strong that he could not live without her -LRB- it had been so especially for the last two years -RRB- , he did not settle any considerable fortune on her and would not have been moved to do so , if she had threatened to leave him . 
But he had presented her with a small sum , and even that was a surprise to everyone when it became known . 
`` You are a wench with brains , '' he said to her , when he gave her eight thousand roubles , `` and you must look after yourself , but let me tell you that except your yearly allowance as before , you 'll get nothing more from me to the day of my death , and I 'll leave you nothing in my will either . '' 
And he kept his word ; he died and left everything to his sons , whom , with their wives and children , he had treated all his life as servants . 
Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will . 
All this became known afterwards . 
He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capital and put business in her way . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch , who first came into contact with Grushenka over a piece of speculation , ended to his own surprise by falling madly in love with her , old Samsonov , gravely ill as he was , was immensely amused . 
It is remarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance Grushenka was absolutely and spontaneously open with the old man , and he seems to have been the only person in the world with whom she was so . 
Of late , when Dmitri too had come on the scene with his love , the old man left off laughing . 
On the contrary , he once gave Grushenka a stern and earnest piece of advice . 
`` If you have to choose between the two , father or son , you 'd better choose the old man , if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry you and settle some fortune on you beforehand . 
But do n't keep on with the captain , you 'll get no good out of that . '' 
These were the very words of the old profligate , who felt already that his death was not far off and who actually died five months later . 
I will note too , in passing - that although many in our town knew of the grotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs , father and son , the object of which was Grushenka , scarcely anyone understood what really underlay her attitude to both of them . 
Even Grushenka 's two servants -LRB- after the catastrophe of which we will speak later -RRB- testified in court that she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because `` he threatened to murder her . '' 
These servants were an old cook , invalidish and almost deaf , who came from Grushenka 's old home , and her granddaughter , a smart young girl of twenty , who performed the duties of a maid . 
Grushenka lived very economically and her surroundings were anything but luxurious . 
Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished with mahogany furniture in the fashion of 1820 , belonging to her landlady . 
It was quite dark when Rakitin and Alyosha entered her rooms , yet they were not lighted up . 
Grushenka was lying down in her drawing-room on the big , hard , clumsy sofa , with a mahogany back . 
The sofa was covered with shabby and ragged leather . 
Under her head she had two white down pillows taken from her bed . 
She was lying stretched out motionless on her back with her hands behind her head . 
She was dressed as though expecting someone , in a black silk dress , with a dainty lace fichu on her head , which was very becoming . 
Over her shoulders was thrown a lace shawl pinned with a massive gold brooch . 
She certainly was expecting someone . 
She lay as though impatient and weary , her face rather pale and her lips and eyes hot , restlessly tapping the arm of the sofa with the tip of her right foot . 
The appearance of Rakitin and Alyosha caused a slight excitement . 
From the hall they could hear Grushenka leap up from the sofa and cry out in a frightened voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
But the maid met the visitors and at once called back to her mistress . 
`` It 's not he , it 's nothing , only other visitors . '' 
`` What can be the matter ? '' 
muttered Rakitin , leading Alyosha into the drawing-room . 
Grushenka was standing by the sofa as though still alarmed . 
