Never mind ; we 'll manage it all the same . 
Do me a great service , my dear boy . 
Go to Tchermashnya on the way . 
It 's only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya , only another twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya . '' 
`` I 'm sorry , I ca n't . 
It 's eighty versts to the railway and the train starts for Moscow at seven o'clock to-night . 
I can only just catch it . '' 
`` You 'll catch it to-morrow or the day after , but to-day turn off to Tchermashnya . 
It wo n't put you out much to humour your father ! 
If I had n't had something to keep me here , I would have run over myself long ago , for I 've some business there in a hurry . 
But here I. . . 
it 's not the time for me to go now ... . 
You see , I 've two pieces of copse land there . 
The Maslovs , an old merchant and his son , will give eight thousand for the timber . 
But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have given twelve . 
There 's no getting anyone about here to buy it . 
The Maslovs have it all their own way . 
One has to take what they 'll give , for no one here dare bid against them . 
The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursday that a merchant called Gorstkin , a man I know , had turned up . 
What makes him valuable is that he is not from these parts , so he is not afraid of the Maslovs . 
He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse . 
Do you hear ? 
But he 'll only be here , the priest writes , for a week altogether , so you must go at once and make a bargain with him . '' 
`` Well , you write to the priest ; he 'll make the bargain . '' 
`` He ca n't do it . 
He has no eye for business . 
He is a perfect treasure , I 'd give him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt ; but he has no eye for business , he is a perfect child , a crow could deceive him . 
And yet he is a learned man , would you believe it ? 
This Gorstkin looks like a peasant , he wears a blue kaftan , but he is a regular rogue . 
That 's the common complaint . 
He is a liar . 
Sometimes he tells such lies that you wonder why he is doing it . 
He told me the year before last that his wife was dead and that he had married another , and would you believe it , there was not a word of truth in it ? 
His wife has never died at all , she is alive to this day and gives him a beating twice a week . 
So what you have to find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth when he says he wants to buy it and would give eleven thousand . '' 
`` I shall be no use in such a business . 
I have no eye either . '' 
`` Stay , wait a bit ! 
You will be of use , for I will tell you the signs by which you can judge about Gorstkin . 
I 've done business with him a long time . 
You see , you must watch his beard ; he has a nasty , thin , red beard . 
If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross , it 's all right , he is saying what he means , he wants to do business . 
But if he strokes his beard with his left hand and grins - he is trying to cheat you . 
Do n't watch his eyes , you wo n't find out anything from his eyes , he is a deep one , a rogue but watch his beard ! 
I 'll give you a note and you show it to him . 
He 's called Gorstkin , though his real name is Lyagavy ; * but do n't call him so , he will be offended . 
If you come to an understanding with him , and see it 's all right , write here at once . 
You need only write : ` He 's not lying . ' 
Stand out for eleven thousand ; one thousand you can knock off , but not more . 
just think ! 
there 's a difference between eight thousand and eleven thousand . 
It 's as good as picking up three thousand ; it 's not so easy to find a purchaser , and I 'm in desperate need of money . 
Only let me know it 's serious , and I 'll run over and fix it up . 
I 'll snatch the time somehow . 
But what 's the good of my galloping over , if it 's all a notion of the priest 's ? 
Come , will you go ? '' 
* i.e. setter dog . 
`` Oh , I ca n't spare the time . 
You must excuse me . '' 
`` Come , you might oblige your father . 
I sha n't forget it . 
You 've no heart , any of you that 's what it is ! 
What 's a day or two to you ? 
Where are you going now - to Venice ? 
Your Venice will keep another two days . 
I would have sent Alyosha , but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that ? 
I send you just because you are a clever fellow . 
Do you suppose I do n't see that ? 
You know nothing about timber , but you 've got an eye . 
All that is wanted is to see whether the man is in earnest . 
I tell you , watch his beard - if his beard shakes you know he is in earnest . '' 
`` You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself , then ? '' 
cried Ivan , with a malignant smile . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch , or would not catch , the malignancy , but he caught the smile . 
`` Then you 'll go , you 'll go ? 
I 'll scribble the note for you at once . '' 
`` I do n't know whether I shall go . 
I do n't know . 
I 'll decide on the way . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
Decide at once . 
My dear fellow , decide ! 
If you settle the matter , write me a line ; give it to the priest and he 'll send it on to me at once . 
And I wo n't delay you more than that . 
You can go to Venice . 
The priest will give you horses back to Volovya station . '' 
The old man was quite delighted . 
He wrote the note , and sent for the horses . 
A light lunch was brought in , with brandy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch was pleased , he usually became expansive , but to-day he seemed to restrain himself . 
Of Dmitri , for instance , he did not say a word . 
He was quite unmoved by the parting , and seemed , in fact , at a loss for something to say . 
Ivan noticed this particularly . 
`` He must be bored with me , '' he thought . 
Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps , the old man began to fuss about . 
He would have kissed him , but Ivan made haste to hold out his hand , obviously avoiding the kiss . 
His father saw it at once , and instantly pulled himself up . 
`` Well , good luck to you , good luck to you ! '' 
he repeated from the steps . 
`` You 'll come again some time or other ? 
