`` I must , I must get back to-night , '' he repeated , as he was jolted along in the cart , `` and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ... to draw up the deed . '' 
So mused Mitya , with a throbbing heart , but alas ! 
his dreams were not fated to be carried out . 
To begin with , he was late , taking a short cut from Volovya station which turned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve . 
Secondly , he did not find the priest at home at Ilyinskoe ; he had gone off to a neighbouring village . 
While Mitya , setting off there with the same exhausted horses , was looking for him , it was almost dark . 
The priest , a shy and amiable looking little man , informed him at once that though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first , he was now at Suhoy Possyolok , that he was staying the night in the forester 's cottage , as he was buying timber there too . 
At Mitya 's urgent request that he would take him to Lyagavy at once , and by so doing `` save him , so to speak , '' the priest agreed , after some demur , to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok ; his curiosity was obviously aroused . 
But , unluckily , he advised their going on foot , as it would not be `` much over '' a verst . 
Mitya , of course , agreed , and marched off with his yard-long strides , so that the poor priest almost ran after him . 
He was a very cautious man , though not old . 
Mitya at once began talking to him , too , of his plans , nervously and excitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy , and talking all the way . 
The priest listened attentively , but gave little advice . 
He turned off Mitya 's questions with : `` I do n't know . 
Ah , I ca n't say . 
How can I tell ? '' 
and so on . 
When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over his inheritance , the priest was positively alarmed , as he was in some way dependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He inquired , however , with surprise , why he called the peasant-trader Gorstkin , Lyagavy , and obligingly explained to Mitya that , though the man 's name really was Lyagavy , he was never called so , as he would be grievously offended at the name , and that he must be sure to call him Gorstkin , `` or you 'll do nothing with him ; he wo n't even listen to you , '' said the priest in conclusion . 
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment , and explained that that was what Samsonov had called him . 
On hearing this fact , the priest dropped the subject , though he would have done well to put into words his doubt whether , if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant , calling him Lyagavy , there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him into ridicule . 
But Mitya had no time to pause over such trifles . 
He hurried , striding along , and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realise that they had come not one verst , nor one and a half , but at least three . 
This annoyed him , but he controlled himself . 
They went into the hut . 
The forester lived in one half of the hut , and Gorstkin was lodging in the other , the better room the other side of the passage . 
They went into that room and lighted a tallow candle . 
The hut was extremely overheated . 
On the table there was a samovar that had gone out , a tray with cups , an empty rum bottle , a bottle of vodka partly full , and some half-eaten crusts of wheaten bread . 
The visitor himself lay stretched at full length on the bench , with his coat crushed up under his head for a pillow , snoring heavily . 
Mitya stood in perplexity . 
`` Of course , I must wake him . 
My business is too important . 
I 've come in such haste . 
I 'm in a hurry to get back to-day , '' he said in great agitation . 
But the priest and the forester stood in silence , not giving their opinion . 
Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself ; he tried vigorously , but the sleeper did not wake . 
`` He 's drunk , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Good Lord ! 
What am I to do ? 
What am I to do ? '' 
And , terribly impatient , he began pulling him by the arms , by the legs , shaking his head , lifting him up and making him sit on the bench . 
Yet , after prolonged exertions , he could only succeed in getting the drunken man to utter absurd grunts , and violent , but inarticulate oaths . 
`` No , you 'd better wait a little , '' the priest pronounced at last , `` for he 's obviously not in a fit state . '' 
`` He 's been drinking the whole day , '' the forester chimed in . 
`` Good heavens ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` If only you knew how important it is to me and how desperate I am ! '' 
`` No , you 'd better wait till morning , '' the priest repeated . 
`` Till morning ? 
Mercy ! 
that 's impossible ! '' 
And in his despair he was on the point of attacking the sleeping man again , but stopped short at once , realising the uselessness of his efforts . 
The priest said nothing , the sleepy forester looked gloomy . 
`` What terrible tragedies real life contrives for people , '' said Mitya , in complete despair . 
The perspiration was streaming down his face . 
The priest seized the moment to put before him , very reasonably , that , even if he succeeded in wakening the man , he would still be drunk and incapable of conversation . 
`` And your business is important , '' he said , `` so you 'd certainly better put it off till morning . '' 
With a gesture of despair Mitya agreed . 
`` Father , I will stay here with a light , and seize the favourable moment . 
As soon as he wakes I 'll begin . 
I 'll pay you for the light , '' he said to the forester , `` for the night 's lodging , too ; you 'll remember Dmitri Karamazov . 
Only Father , I do n't know what we 're to do with you . 
Where will you sleep ? '' 
`` No , I 'm going home . 
I 'll take his horse and get home , '' he said , indicating the forester . 
`` And now I 'll say good-bye . 
I wish you all success . '' 
So it was settled . 
The priest rode off on the forester 's horse , delighted to escape , though he shook his head uneasily , wondering whether he ought not next day to inform his benefactor Fyodor Pavlovitch of this curious incident , `` or he may in an unlucky hour hear of it , be angry , and withdraw his favour . '' 
The forester , scratching himself , went back to his room without a word , and Mitya sat on the bench to `` catch the favourable moment , '' as he expressed it . 
Profound dejection clung about his soul like a heavy mist . 
A profound , intense dejection ! 
He sat thinking , but could reach no conclusion . 
The candle burnt dimly , a cricket chirped ; it became insufferably close in the overheated room . 
He suddenly pictured the garden , the path behind the garden , the door of his father 's house mysteriously opening and Grushenka running in . 
He leapt up from the bench . 
`` It 's a tragedy ! '' 
he said , grinding his teeth . 
Mechanically he went up to the sleeping man and looked in his face . 
He was a lean , middle-aged peasant , with a very long face , flaxen curls , and a long , thin , reddish beard , wearing a blue cotton shirt and a black waistcoat , from the pocket of which peeped the chain of a silver watch . 
Mitya looked at his face with intense hatred , and for some unknown reason his curly hair particularly irritated him . 
What was insufferably humiliating was that , after leaving things of such importance and making such sacrifices , he , Mitya , utterly worn out , should with business of such urgency be standing over this dolt on whom his whole fate depended , while he snored as though there were nothing the matter , as though he 'd dropped from another planet . 
`` Oh , the irony of fate ! '' 
cried Mitya , and , quite losing his head , he fell again to rousing the tipsy peasant . 
He roused him with a sort of ferocity , pulled at him , pushed him , even beat him ; but after five minutes of vain exertions , he returned to his bench in helpless despair , and sat down . 
`` Stupid ! 
Stupid ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` And how dishonourable it all is ! '' 
something made him add . 
His head began to ache horribly . 
`` Should he fling it up and go away altogether ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` No , wait till to-morrow now . 
I 'll stay on purpose . 
What else did I come for ? 
Besides , I 've no means of going . 
How am I to get away from here now ? 
Oh , the idiocy of it '' But his head ached more and more . 
