From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him and seemed even to have taken a dislike to him , so much so that Alyosha gave up going to see him . 
Immediately after that meeting with him , Ivan had not gone home , but went straight to Smerdyakov again . 
The Second Visit to Smerdyakov BY that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital . 
Ivan knew his new lodging , the dilapidated little wooden house , divided in two by a passage , on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother , and on the other , Smerdyakov . 
No one knew on what terms he lived with them , whether as a friend or as a lodger . 
It was supposed afterwards that he had come to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna 's betrothed , and was living there for a time without paying for board or lodging . 
Both mother and daughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatly superior to themselves . 
Ivan knocked , and , on the door being opened , went straight into the passage . 
By Marya Kondratyevna 's directions he went straight to the better room on the left , occupied by Smerdyakov . 
There was a tiled stove in the room and it was extremely hot . 
The walls were gay with blue paper , which was a good deal used however , and in the cracks under it cockroaches swarmed in amazing numbers , so that there was a continual rustling from them . 
The furniture was very scanty : two benches against each wall and two chairs by the table . 
The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth with pink patterns on it . 
There was a pot of geranium on each of the two little windows . 
In the corner there was a case of ikons . 
On the table stood a little copper samovar with many dents in it , and a tray with two cups . 
But Smerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out . 
He was sitting at the table on a bench . 
He was looking at an exercise-book and slowly writing with a pen . 
There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick , but with a composite candle . 
Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov 's face that he had completely recovered from his illness . 
His face was fresher , fuller , his hair stood up jauntily in front , and was plastered down at the sides . 
He was sitting in a parti-coloured , wadded dressing-gown , rather dirty and frayed , however . 
He had spectacles on his nose , which Ivan had never seen him wearing before . 
This trifling circumstance suddenly redoubled Ivan 's anger : `` A creature like that and wearing spectacles ! '' 
Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitor through his spectacles ; then he slowly took them off and rose from the bench , but by no means respectfully , almost lazily , doing the least possible required by common civility . 
All this struck Ivan instantly ; he took it all in and noted it at once - most of all the look in Smerdyakov 's eyes , positively malicious , churlish and haughty . 
`` What do you want to intrude for ? '' 
it seemed to say ; `` we settled everything then ; why have you come again ? '' 
Ivan could scarcely control himself . 
`` It 's hot here , '' he said , still standing , and unbuttoned his overcoat . 
`` Take off your coat , '' Smerdyakov conceded . 
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands . 
He took a chair , moved it quickly to the table and sat down . 
Smerdyakov managed to sit down on his bench before him . 
`` To begin with , are we alone ? '' 
Ivan asked sternly and impulsively . 
`` Can they overhear us in there ? '' 
`` No one can hear anything . 
You 've seen for yourself : there 's a passage . '' 
`` Listen , my good fellow ; what was that you babbled , as I was leaving the hospital , that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits , you would n't tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate ? 
What do you mean by all ? 
What could you mean by it ? 
Were you threatening me ? 
Have I entered into some sort of compact with you ? 
Do you suppose I am afraid of you ? '' 
Ivan said this in a perfect fury , giving him to understand with obvious intention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to show his cards . 
Smerdyakov 's eyes gleamed resentfully , his left eye winked , and he at once gave his answer , with his habitual composure and deliberation . 
`` You want to have everything above-board ; very well , you shall have it , '' he seemed to say . 
`` This is what I meant then , and this is why I said that , that you , knowing beforehand of this murder of your own parent , left him to his fate , and that people might n't after that conclude any evil about your feelings and perhaps of something else , too - that 's what I promised not to tell the authorities . '' 
Though Smerdyakov spoke without haste and obviously controlling himself , yet there was something in his voice , determined and emphatic , resentful and insolently defiant . 
He stared impudently at Ivan . 
A mist passed before Ivan 's eyes for the first moment . 
`` How ? 
What ? 
Are you out of your mind ? '' 
`` I 'm perfectly in possession of all my faculties . '' 
`` Do you suppose I knew of the murder ? '' 
Ivan cried at last , and he brought his fist violently on the table . 
`` What do you mean by ` something else , too ' ? 
Speak , scoundrel ! '' 
Smerdyakov was silent and still scanned Ivan with the same insolent stare . 
`` Speak , you stinking rogue , what is that ` something else , too ' ? '' 
`` The ` something else ' I meant was that you probably , too , were very desirous of your parent 's death . '' 
Ivan jumped up and struck him with all his might on the shoulder , so that he fell back against the wall . 
In an instant his face was bathed in tears . 
Saying , `` It 's a shame , sir , to strike a sick man , '' he dried his eyes with a very dirty blue check handkerchief and sank into quiet weeping . 
A minute passed . 
`` That 's enough ! 
Leave off , '' Ivan said peremptorily , sitting down again . 
`` Do n't put me out of all patience . '' 
Smerdyakov took the rag from his eyes . 
Every line of his puckered face reflected the insult he had just received . 
`` So you thought then , you scoundrel , that together with Dmitri I meant to kill my father ? '' 
`` I did n't know what thoughts were in your mind then , '' said Smerdyakov resentfully ; `` and so I stopped you then at the gate to sound you on that very point . '' 
`` To sound what , what ? '' 
`` Why , that very circumstance , whether you wanted your father to be murdered or not . '' 
What infuriated Ivan more than anything was the aggressive , insolent tone to which Smerdyakov persistently adhered . 
`` It was you murdered him ? '' 
he cried suddenly . 
Smerdyakov smiled contemptuously . 
`` You know of yourself , for a fact , that it was n't I murdered him . 
And I should have thought that there was no need for a sensible man to speak of it again . '' 
`` But why , why had you such a suspicion about me at the time ? '' 
`` As you know already , it was simply from fear . 
For I was in such a position , shaking with fear , that I suspected everyone . 
I resolved to sound you , too , for I thought if you wanted the same as your brother , then the business was as good as settled and I should be crushed like a fly , too . '' 
`` Look here , you did n't say that a fortnight ago . '' 
`` I meant the same when I talked to you in the hospital , only I thought you 'd understand without wasting words , and that being such a sensible man you would n't care to talk of it openly . '' 
`` What next ! 
Come answer , answer , I insist : what was it ... what could I have done to put such a degrading suspicion into your mean soul ? '' 
`` As for the murder , you could n't have done that and did n't want to , but as for wanting someone else to do it , that was just what you did want . '' 
`` And how coolly , how coolly he speakst But why should I have wanted it ; what grounds had I for wanting it ? '' 
`` What grounds had you ? 
What about the inheritance ? '' 
said Smerdyakov sarcastically , and , as it were , vindictively . 
`` Why , after your parent 's death there was at least forty thousand to come to each of you , and very likely more , but if Fyodor Pavlovitch got married then to that lady , Agrafena Alexandrovna , she would have had all his capital made over to her directly after the wedding , for she 's plenty of sense , so that your parent would not have left you two roubles between the three of you . 
And were they far from a wedding , either ? 
Not a hair 's - breadth : that lady had only to lift her little finger and he would have run after her to church , with his tongue out . '' 
Ivan restrained himself with painful effort . 
