He had no watch , but he had a tortoise-shell lorgnette on a black ribbon . 
On the middle finger of his right hand was a massive gold ring with a cheap opal stone in it . 
Ivan was angrily silent and would not begin the conversation . 
The visitor waited and sat exactly like a poor relation who had come down from his room to keep his host company at tea , and was discreetly silent , seeing that his host was frowning and preoccupied . 
But he was ready for any affable conversation as soon as his host should begin it . 
All at once his face expressed a sudden solicitude . 
`` I say , '' he began to Ivan , `` excuse me , I only mention it to remind you . 
You went to Smerdyakov 's to find out about Katerina Ivanovna , but you came away without finding out anything about her , you probably forgot - '' `` Ah , yes . '' 
broke from Ivan and his face grew gloomy with uneasiness . 
`` Yes , I 'd forgotten ... but it does n't matter now , never mind , till to-morrow , '' he muttered to himself , `` and you , '' he added , addressing his visitor , `` I should have remembered that myself in a minute , for that was just what was tormenting me ! 
Why do you interfere , as if I should believe that you prompted me , and that I did n't remember it of myself ? '' 
`` Do n't believe it then , '' said the gentleman , smiling amicably , `` what 's the good of believing against your will ? 
Besides , proofs are no help to believing , especially material proofs . 
Thomas believed , not because he saw Christ risen , but because he wanted to believe , before he saw . 
Look at the spiritualists , for instance ... . 
I am very fond of them ... only fancy , they imagine that they are serving the cause of religion , because the devils show them their horns from the other world . 
That , they say , is a material proof , so to speak , of the existence of another world . 
The other world and material proofs , what next ! 
And if you come to that , does proving there 's a devil prove that there 's a God ? 
I want to join an idealist society , I 'll lead the opposition in it , I 'll say I am a realist , but not a materialist , he he ! '' 
`` Listen , '' Ivan suddenly got up from the table . 
`` I seem to be delirious ... I am delirious , in fact , talk any nonsense you like , I do n't care ! 
You wo n't drive me to fury , as you did last time . 
But I feel somehow ashamed ... I want to walk about the room ... . 
I sometimes do n't see you and do n't even hear your voice as I did last time , but I always guess what you are prating , for it 's I , I myself speaking , not you . 
Only I do n't know whether I was dreaming last time or whether I really saw you . 
I 'll wet a towel and put it on my head and perhaps you 'll vanish into air . '' 
Ivan went into the corner , took a towel , and did as he said , and with a wet towel on his head began walking up and down the room . 
`` I am so glad you treat me so familiarly , '' the visitor began . 
`` Fool , '' laughed Ivan , `` do you suppose I should stand on ceremony with you ? 
I am in good spirits now , though I 've a pain in my forehead ... and in the top of my head ... only please do n't talk philosophy , as you did last time . 
If you ca n't take yourself off , talk of something amusing . 
Talk gossip , you are a poor relation , you ought to talk gossip . 
What a nightmare to have ! 
But I am not afraid of you . 
I 'll get the better of you . 
I wo n't be taken to a mad-house ! '' 
`` C'est charmant , poor relation . 
Yes , I am in my natural shape . 
For what am I on earth but a poor relation ? 
By the way , I am listening to you and am rather surprised to find you are actually beginning to take me for something real , not simply your fancy , as you persisted in declaring last time - '' `` Never for one minute have I taken you for reality , '' Ivan cried with a sort of fury . 
`` You are a lie , you are my illness , you are a phantom . 
It 's only that I do n't know how to destroy you and I see I must suffer for a time . 
You are my hallucination . 
You are the incarnation of myself , but only of one side of me ... of my thoughts and feelings , but only the nastiest and stupidest of them . 
From that point of view you might be of interest to me , if only I had time to waste on you - '' `` Excuse me , excuse me , I 'll catch you . 
When you flew out at Alyosha under the lamp-post this evening and shouted to him , ` You learnt it from him ! 
How do you know that he visits me ? ' 
You were thinking of me then . 
So for one brief moment you did believe that I really exist , '' the gentleman laughed blandly . 
`` Yes , that was a moment of weakness ... but I could n't believe in you . 
I do n't know whether I was asleep or awake last time . 
Perhaps I was only dreaming then and did n't see you really at all - '' `` And why were you so surly with Alyosha just now ? 
He is a dear ; I 've treated him badly over Father Zossima . '' 
`` Do n't talk of Alyosha ! 
How dare you , you flunkey ! '' 
Ivan laughed again . 
`` You scold me , but you laugh - that 's a good sign . 
But you are ever so much more polite than you were last time and I know why : that great resolution of yours - '' `` Do n't speak of my resolution , '' cried Ivan , savagely . 
`` I understand , I understand , c'est noble , c'est charmant , you are going to defend your brother and to sacrifice yourself ... C'est chevaleresque . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , I 'll kick you ! '' 
`` I sha n't be altogether sorry , for then my object will be attained . 
If you kick me , you must believe in my reality , for people do n't kick ghosts . 
Joking apart , it does n't matter to me , scold if you like , though it 's better to be a trifle more polite even to me . 
` Fool , flunkey ! ' 
what words ! '' 
`` Scolding you , I scold myself , '' Ivan laughed again , `` you are myself , myself , only with a different face . 
You just say what I am thinking ... and are incapable of saying anything new ! '' 
`` If I am like you in my way of thinking , it 's all to my credit , '' the gentleman declared , with delicacy and dignity . 
`` You choose out only my worst thoughts , and what 's more , the stupid ones . 
You are stupid and vulgar . 
You are awfully stupid . 
No , I ca n't put up with you ! 
What am I to do , what am I to do ? '' 
Ivan said through his clenched teeth . 
`` My dear friend , above all things I want to behave like a gentleman and to be recognised as such , '' the visitor began in an access of deprecating and simple-hearted pride , typical of a poor relation . 
`` I am poor , but ... I wo n't say very honest , but ... it 's an axiom generally accepted in society that I am a fallen angel . 
I certainly ca n't conceive how I can ever have been an angel . 
If I ever was , it must have been so long ago that there 's no harm in forgetting it . 
Now I only prize the reputation of being a gentlemanly person and live as I can , trying to make myself agreeable . 
I love men genuinely , I 've been greatly calumniated ! 
Here when I stay with you from time to time , my life gains a kind of reality and that 's what I like most of all . 
You see , like you , I suffer from the fantastic and so I love the realism of earth . 
Here , with you , everything is circumscribed , here all is formulated and geometrical , while we have nothing but indeterminate equations ! 
I wander about here dreaming . 
I like dreaming . 
Besides , on earth I become superstitious . 
Please do n't laugh , that 's just what I like , to become superstitious . 
I adopt all your habits here : I 've grown fond of going to the public baths , would you believe it ? 
and I go and steam myself with merchants and priests . 
What I dream of is becoming incarnate once for all and irrevocably in the form of some merchant 's wife weighing eighteen stone , and of believing all she believes . 
My ideal is to go to church and offer a candle in simple-hearted faith , upon my word it is . 
Then there would be an end to my sufferings . 
I like being doctored too ; in the spring there was an outbreak of smallpox and I went and was vaccinated in a foundling hospital - if only you knew how I enjoyed myself that day . 
I subscribed ten roubles in the cause of the Slavs ! 
... But you are not listening . 
Do you know , you are not at all well this evening ? 
I know you went yesterday to that doctor ... well , what about your health ? 
What did the doctor say ? '' 
`` Fool ! '' 
