Once we went , a whole lot of us , for a picnic , in seven sledges . 
It was dark , it was winter , and I began squeezing a girl 's hand , and forced her to kiss me . 
She was the daughter of an official , a sweet , gentle , submissive creature . 
She allowed me , she allowed me much in the dark . 
She thought , poor thing , that I should come next day to make her an offer -LRB- I was looked upon as a good match , too -RRB- . 
But I did n't say a word to her for five months . 
I used to see her in a corner at dances -LRB- we were always having dances -RRB- , her eyes watching me . 
I saw how they glowed with fire - a fire of gentle indignation . 
This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my soul . 
Five months later she married an official and left the town , still angry , and still , perhaps , in love with me . 
Now they live happily . 
Observe that I told no one . 
I did n't boast of it . 
Though I 'm full of low desires , and love what 's low , I 'm not dishonourable . 
You 're blushing ; your eyes flashed . 
Enough of this filth with you . 
And all this was nothing much - wayside blossoms a la Paul de Kock - though the cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul . 
I 've a perfect album of reminiscences , brother . 
God bless them , the darlings . 
I tried to break it off without quarrelling . 
And I never gave them away , I never bragged of one of them . 
But that 's enough . 
You ca n't suppose I brought you here simply to talk of such nonsense . 
No , I 'm going to tell you something more curious ; and do n't be surprised that I 'm glad to tell you , instead of being ashamed . '' 
`` You say that because I blushed , '' Alyosha said suddenly . 
`` I was n't blushing at what you were saying or at what you 've done . 
I blushed because I am the same as you are . '' 
`` You ? 
Come , that 's going a little too far ! '' 
`` No , it 's not too far , '' said Alyosha warmly -LRB- obviously the idea was not a new one -RRB- . 
`` The ladder 's the same . 
I 'm at the bottom step , and you 're above , somewhere about the thirteenth . 
That 's how I see it . 
But it 's all the same . 
Absolutely the same in kind . 
Anyone on the bottom step is bound to go up to the top one . '' 
`` Then one ought not to step on at all . '' 
`` Anyone who can help it had better not . '' 
`` But can you ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` Hush , Alyosha , hush , darling ! 
I could kiss your hand , you touch me so . 
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men . 
She told me once that she 'd devour you one day . 
There , there , I wo n't ! 
From this field of corruption fouled by flies , let 's pass to my tragedy , also befouled by flies , that is , by every sort of vileness . 
Although the old man told lies about my seducing innocence , there really was something of the sort in my tragedy , though it was only once , and then it did not come off . 
The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does not even know of this fact ; I never told anyone about it . 
You 're the first , except Ivan , of course - Ivan knows everything . 
He knew about it long before you . 
But Ivan 's a tomb . '' 
`` Ivan 's a tomb ? '' 
Alyosha listened with great attention . 
`` I was lieutenant in a line regiment , but still I was under supervision , like a kind of convict . 
Yet I was awfully well received in the little town . 
I spent money right and left . 
I was thought to be rich ; I thought so myself . 
But I must have pleased them in other ways as well . 
Although they shook their heads over me , they liked me . 
My colonel , who was an old man , took a sudden dislike to me . 
He was always down upon me , but I had powerful friends , and , moreover , all the town was on my side , so he could n't do me much harm . 
I was in fault myself for refusing to treat him with proper respect . 
I was proud . 
This obstinate old fellow , who was really a very good sort , kind-hearted and hospitable , had had two wives , both dead . 
His first wife , who was of a humble family , left a daughter as unpretentious as herself . 
She was a young woman of four and twenty when I was there , and was living with her father and an aunt , her mother 's sister . 
The aunt was simple and illiterate ; the niece was simple but lively . 
I like to say nice things about people . 
I never knew a woman of more charming character than Agafya - fancy , her name was Agafya Ivanovna ! 
And she was n't bad-looking either , in the Russian style : tall , stout , with a full figure , and beautiful eyes , though a rather coarse face . 
She had not married , although she had had two suitors . 
She refused them , but was as cheerful as ever . 
I was intimate with her , not in ` that ' way , it was pure friendship . 
I have often been friendly with women quite innocently . 
I used to talk to her with shocking frankness , and she only laughed . 
Many woman like such freedom , and she was a girl too , which made it very amusing . 
Another thing , one could never think of her as a young lady . 
She and her aunt lived in her father 's house with a sort of voluntary humility , not putting themselves on an equality with other people . 
She was a general favourite , and of use of everyone , for she was a clever dressmaker . 
She had a talent for it . 
She gave her services freely without asking for payment , but if anyone offered her payment , she did n't refuse . 
The colonel , of course , was a very different matter . 
He was one of the chief personages in the district . 
He kept open house , entertained the whole town , gave suppers and dances . 
At the time I arrived and joined the battalion , all the town was talking of the expected return of the colonel 's second daughter , a great beauty , who had just left a fashionable school in the capital . 
This second daughter is Katerina Ivanovna , and she was the child of the second wife , who belonged to a distinguished general 's family ; although , as I learnt on good authority , she too brought the colonel no money . 
She had connections , and that was all . 
There may have been expectations , but they had come to nothing . 
`` Yet , when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit , the whole town revived . 
Our most distinguished ladies - two ` Excellencies ' and a colonel 's wife - and all the rest following their lead , at once took her up and gave entertainments in her honour . 
She was the belle of the balls and picnics , and they got up tableaux vivants in aid of distressed governesses . 
I took no notice , I went on as wildly as before , and one of my exploits at the time set all the town talking . 
I saw her eyes taking my measure one evening at the battery commander 's , but I did n't go up to her , as though I disdained her acquaintance . 
I did go up and speak to her at an evening party not long after . 
She scarcely looked at me , and compressed her lips scornfully . 
` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have my revenge , ' thought I. I behaved like an awful fool on many occasions at that time , and I was conscious of it myself . 
What made it worse was that I felt that ` Katenka ' was not an innocent boarding-school miss , but a person of character , proud and really high-principled ; above all , she had education and intellect , and I had neither . 
You think I meant to make her an offer ? 
No , I simply wanted to revenge myself , because I was such a hero and she did n't seem to feel it . 
