I should n't have said it , if I had known . 
I should have praised it . 
Poets are all so irritable , ' he said . 
In short , he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone . 
He explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic . 
I thought he was in earnest . 
Only as I lay there , just as before you now , I thought , ` Would it , or would it not , be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house ? ' 
And , would you believe it , I lay here , shut my eyes , and wondered , would it be the proper thing or not . 
I kept worrying and worrying , and my heart began to beat , and I could n't make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not . 
One voice seemed to be telling me , ` Speak , ' and the other ` No , do n't speak . ' 
And no sooner had the second voice said that than I cried out , and fainted . 
Of course , there was a fuss . 
I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin , ` It 's painful for me to say it , but I do n't wish to see you in my house again . ' 
So I turned him out . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I know myself I did wrong . 
I was putting it on . 
I was n't angry with him at all , really ; but I suddenly fancied - that was what did it - that it would be such a fine scene ... . 
And yet , believe me , it was quite natural , for I really shed tears and cried for several days afterwards , and then suddenly , one afternoon , I forgot all about it . 
So it 's a fortnight since he 's been here , and I kept wondering whether he would come again . 
I wondered even yesterday , then suddenly last night came this Gossip . 
I read it and gasped . 
Who could have written it ? 
He must have written it . 
He went home , sat down , wrote it on the spot , sent it , and they put it in . 
It was a fortnight ago , you see . 
But , Alyosha , it 's awful how I keep talking and do n't say what I want to say . 
the words come of themselves ! '' 
`` It 's very important for me to be in time to see my brother to-day , '' Alyosha faltered . 
`` To be sure , to be sure ! 
You bring it all back to me . 
Listen , what is an aberration ? '' 
`` What aberration ? '' 
asked Alyosha , wondering . 
`` In the legal sense . 
An aberration in which everything is pardonable . 
Whatever you do , you will be acquitted at once . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
This Katya ... Ah ! 
she is a charming , charming creature , only I never can make out who it is she is in love with . 
She was with me some time ago and I could n't get anything out of her . 
Especially as she wo n't talk to me except on the surface now . 
She is always talking about my health and nothing else , and she takes up such a tone with me , too . 
I simply said to myself , ` Well so be it . 
I do n't care ' ... Oh , yes . 
I was talking of aberration . 
This doctor has come . 
You know a doctor has come ? 
Of course , you know it - the one who discovers madmen . 
You wrote for him . 
No , it was n't you , but Katya . 
It 's all Katya 's doing . 
Well , you see , a man may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration . 
He may be conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration . 
And there 's no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from aberration . 
They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were reformed . 
It 's all the good effect of the reformed law courts . 
The doctor has been here and questioned me about that evening , about the gold mines . 
` How did he seem then ? ' 
he asked me . 
He must have been in a state of aberration . 
He came in shouting , ` Money , money , three thousand ! 
Give me three thousand ! ' 
and then went away and immediately did the murder . ' 
I do n't want to murder him , ' he said , and he suddenly went and murdered him . 
That 's why they 'll acquit him , because he struggled against it and yet he murdered him . '' 
`` But he did n't murder him , '' Alyosha interrupted rather sharply . 
He felt more and more sick with anxiety and impatience . 
`` Yes , I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him . '' 
`` Grigory ? '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Yes , yes ; it was Grigory . 
He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down , and then got up , saw the door open , went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
`` But why , why ? '' 
`` Suffering from aberration . 
When he recovered from the blow Dmitri Fyodorovitch gave him on the head , he was suffering from aberration : he went and committed the murder . 
As for his saying he did n't , he very likely does n't remember . 
Only , you know , it 'll be better , ever so much better , if Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him . 
And that 's how it must have been , though I say it was Grigory . 
It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that 's better , ever so much better ! 
Oh ! 
not better that a son should have killed his father , I do n't defend that . 
Children ought to honour their parents , and yet it would be better if it were he , as you 'd have nothing to cry over then , for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was conscious , but did not know what he was doing . 
Let them acquit him - that 's so humane , and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are . 
I knew nothing about it , but they say they have been so a long time . 
And when I heard it yesterday , I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at once . 
And if he is acquitted , make him come straight from the law courts to dinner with me , and I 'll have a party of friends , and we 'll drink to the reformed law courts . 
I do n't believe he 'd be dangerous ; besides , I 'll invite a great many friends , so that he could always be led out if he did anything . 
And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in another town , for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best judges . 
And , besides , who is n't suffering from aberration nowadays ? 
- you , I , all of us , are in a state of aberration , and there are ever so many examples of it : a man sits singing a song , suddenly something annoys him , he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across , and no one blames him for it . 
I read that lately , and all the doctors confirm it . 
The doctors are always confirming ; they confirm , - anything . 
Why , my Lise is in a state of aberration . 
She made me cry again yesterday , and the day before , too , and to-day I suddenly realised that it 's all due to aberration . 
Oh , Lise grieves me so ! 
I believe she 's quite mad . 
Why did she send for you ? 
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself ? '' 
