I 'm silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha 's right , quite right , in not wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl . '' 
`` I will certainly send him , '' said the elder . 
So Be It ! 
So Be It ! 
THE elder 's absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty-five minutes . 
It was more than half-past twelve , but Dmitri , on whose account they had all met there , had still not appeared . 
But he seemed almost to be forgotten , and when the elder entered the cell again , he found his guests engaged in eager conversation . 
Ivan and the two monks took the leading share in it . 
Miusov , too , was trying to take a part , and apparently very eagerly , in the conversation . 
But he was unsuccessful in this also . 
He was evidently in the background , and his remarks were treated with neglect , which increased his irritability . 
He had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him . 
`` Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is progressive in Europe , and here the new generation positively ignores us , '' he thought . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had given his word to sit still and be quiet , had actually been quiet for some time , but he watched his neighbour Miusov with an ironical little smile , obviously enjoying his discomfiture . 
He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores , and now he could not let the opportunity slip . 
Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper . 
`` Why did n't you go away just now , after the ` courteously kissing ' ? 
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company ? 
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved , and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence . 
Now you wo n't go till you 've displayed your intellect to them . '' 
`` You again ? 
... On the contrary , I 'm just going . '' 
`` You 'll be the last , the last of all to go ! '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered him another thrust , almost at the moment of Father Zossima 's return . 
The discussion died down for a moment , but the elder , seating himself in his former place , looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to go on . 
Alyosha , who knew every expression of his face , saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort . 
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion . 
His face had the pallor that was common before such attacks , and his lips were white . 
But he evidently did not want to break up the party . 
He seemed to have some special object of his own in keeping them . 
What object ? 
Alyosha watched him intently . 
`` We are discussing this gentleman 's most interesting article , '' said Father Iosif , the librarian , addressing the elder , and indicating Ivan . 
`` He brings forward much that is new , but I think the argument cuts both ways . 
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court , and the scope of its jurisdiction . '' 
`` I 'm sorry I have not read your article , but I 've heard of it , '' said the elder , looking keenly and intently at Ivan . 
`` He takes up a most interesting position , '' continued the Father Librarian . 
`` As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed to the separation of Church from State . '' 
`` That 's interesting . 
But in what sense ? '' 
Father Zossima asked Ivan . 
The latter , at last , answered him , not condescendingly , as Alyosha had feared , but with modesty and reserve , with evident goodwill and apparently without the slightest arrierepensee `` I start from the position that this confusion of elements , that is , of the essential principles of Church and State , will , of course , go on for ever , in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle , and that the confusion of these elements can not lead to any consistent or even normal results , for there is falsity at the very foundation of it . 
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as , for instance , jurisdiction , is , to my thinking , impossible in any real sense . 
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined position in the State . 
I maintain , on the contrary , that the Church ought to include the whole State , and not simply to occupy a corner in it , and , if this is , for some reason , impossible at present , then it ought , in reality , to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society ! '' 
`` Perfectly true , '' Father Paissy , the silent and learned monk , assented with fervour and decision . 
`` The purest Ultramontanism ! '' 
cried Miusov impatiently , crossing and recrossing his legs . 
`` Oh , well , we have no mountains , '' cried Father Iosif , and turning to the elder he continued : `` Observe the answer he makes to the following ` fundamental and essential ' propositions of his opponent , who is , you must note , an ecclesiastic . 
First , that ` no social organisation can or ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights of its members . ' 
Secondly , that ` criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not to belong to the Church , and is inconsistent with its nature , both as a divine institution and as an organisation of men for religious objects , ' and , finally , in the third place , ` the Church is a kingdom not of this world . ' 
`` A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic ! '' 
Father Paissy could not refrain from breaking in again . 
`` I have read the book which you have answered , '' he added , addressing Ivan , `` and was astounded at the words ` The Church is a kingdom not of this world . 
` If it is not of this world , then it can not exist on earth at all . 
In the Gospel , the words ` not of this world ' are not used in that sense . 
To play with such words is indefensible . 
Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth . 
The Kingdom of Heaven , of course , is not of this world , but in Heaven ; but it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and established upon earth . 
And so a frivolous play upon words in such a connection is unpardonable and improper . 
The Church is , in truth , a kingdom and ordained to rule , and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth . 
For that we have the divine promise . '' 
He ceased speaking suddenly , as though checking himself . 
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on , addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality : `` The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church . 
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian , it inevitably happened that , by becoming Christian , it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments . 
In reality this was bound to happen . 
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilisation and culture , as , for example , in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State . 
The Christian Church entering into the State could , of course , surrender no part of its fundamental principles - the rock on which it stands - and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself , and among them that of drawing the whole world , and therefore the ancient pagan State itself , into the Church . 
In that way -LRB- that is , with a view to the future -RRB- it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State , like ` every social organisation , ' or as ` an organisation of men for religious purposes ' -LRB- as my opponent calls the Church -RRB- , but , on the contrary , every earthly State should be , in the end , completely transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church , rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church . 
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honour and glory as a great State , nor from the glory of its rulers , but only turns it from a false , still pagan , and mistaken path to the true and rightful path , which alone leads to the eternal goal . 
This is why the author of the book On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction would have judged correctly if , in seeking and laying down those foundations , he bad looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days . 
But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he predicates now , part of which Father Iosif just enumerated , are the permanent , essential , and eternal foundations , he is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation . 
That is the gist of my article . '' 
`` That is , in brief , '' Father Paissy began again , laying stress on each word , `` according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the nineteenth century , the Church ought to be transformed into the State , as though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form , so as to disappear into it , making way for science , for the spirit of the age , and civilisation . 
And if the Church resists and is unwilling , some corner will be set apart for her in the State , and even that under control and this will be so everywhere in all modern European countries . 
But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State , but , on the contrary , that the State should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else . 
So be it ! 
So be it ! '' 
`` Well , I confess you 've reassured me somewhat , '' Miusov said smiling , again crossing his legs . 
`` So far as I understand , then , the realisation of such an ideal is infinitely remote , at the second coming of Christ . 
That 's as you please . 
It 's a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war , diplomacy , banks , and so on - something after the fashion of socialism , indeed . 
But I imagined that it was all meant seriously , and that the Church might be now going to try criminals , and sentence them to beating , prison , and even death . '' 
`` But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court , the Church would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death . 
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change , not all at once of course , but fairly soon , '' Ivan replied calmly , without flinching . 
`` Are you serious ? '' 
Miusov glanced keenly at him . 
`` If everything became the Church , the Church would exclude all the criminal and disobedient , and would not cut off their heads , '' Ivan went on . 
`` I ask you , what would become of the excluded ? 
He would be cut off then not only from men , as now , but from Christ . 
By his crime he would have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ . 
This is so even now , of course , strictly speaking , but it is not clearly enunciated , and very , very often the criminal of to-day compromises with his conscience : ' I steal , ' he says , ` but I do n't go against the Church . 
I 'm not an enemy of Christ . ' 
That 's what the criminal of to-day is continually saying to himself , but when the Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him , in opposition to the Church all over the world , to say : ` All men are mistaken , all in error , all mankind are the false Church . 
I , a thief and murderer , am the only true Christian Church . ' 
It will be very difficult to say this to himself ; it requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances . 
Now , on the other side , take the Church 's own view of crime : is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan attitude , and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation of society , as at present , into completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man , of his reformation and salvation ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
I fail to understand again , '' Miusov interrupted . 
`` Some sort of dream again . 
