A thick coil of her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on her right shoulder , but she did not notice it and did not put it back till she had gazed at her visitors and recognised them . 
`` Ah , it 's you , Rakitin ? 
You quite frightened me . 
Whom have you brought ? 
Who is this with you ? 
Good heavens , you have brought him ! '' 
she exclaimed , recognising Alyosha . 
`` Do send for candles ! '' 
said Rakitin , with the free-and-easy air of a most intimate friend , who is privileged to give orders in the house . 
`` Candles ... of course , candles ... . 
Fenya , fetch him a candle ... . 
Well , you have chosen a moment to bring him ! 
she exclaimed again , nodding towards Alyosha , and turning to the looking-glass she began quickly fastening up her hair with both hands . 
She seemed displeased . 
`` Have n't I managed to please you ? '' 
asked Rakitin , instantly almost offended . 
You frightened me , Rakitin , that 's what it is . '' 
Grushenka turned with a smile to Alyosha . 
`` Do n't be afraid of me , my dear Alyosha , you can not think how glad I am to see you , my unexpected visitor . 
But you frightened me , Rakitin , I thought it was Mitya breaking in . 
You see , I deceived him just now , I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie . 
I told him that I was going to spend the evening with my old man , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and should be there till late counting up his money . 
I always spend one whole evening a week with him making up his accounts . 
We lock ourselves in and he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down in the book . 
I am the only person he trusts . 
Mitya believes that I am there , but I came back and have been sitting locked in here , expecting some news . 
How was it Fenya let you in ? 
Fenya , Fenya , run out to the gate , open it and look about whether the captain is to be seen ! 
Perhaps he is hiding and spying , I am dreadfully frightened . '' 
There 's no one there , Agrafena Alexandrovna , I 've just looked out ; I keep running to peep through the crack ; I am in fear and trembling myself . '' 
`` Are the shutters fastened , Fenya ? 
And we must draw the curtains - that 's better ! '' 
She drew the heavy curtains herself . 
`` He 'd rush in at once if he saw a light . 
I am afraid of your brother Mitya to-day , Alyosha . '' 
Grushenka spoke aloud , and , though she was alarmed , she seemed very happy about something . 
`` Why are you so afraid of Mitya to-day ? '' 
inquired Rakitin . 
`` I should have thought you were not timid with him , you 'd twist him round your little finger . '' 
`` I tell you , I am expecting news , priceless news , so I do n't want Mitya at all . 
And he did n't believe , I feel he did n't , that I should stay at Kuzma Kuzmitch 's . 
He must be in his ambush now , behind Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , in the garden , watching for me . 
And if he 's there , he wo n't come here , so much the better ! 
But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch 's , Mitya escorted me there . 
I told him I should stay there till midnight , and I asked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home . 
He went away and I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again . 
Ugh , I was afraid , I ran for fear of meeting him . '' 
`` And why are you so dressed up ? 
What a curious cap you 've got on ! '' 
`` How curious you are yourself , Rakitin ! 
I tell you , I am expecting a message . 
If the message comes , I shall fly , I shall gallop away and you will see no more of me . 
That 's why I am dressed up , so as to be ready . '' 
`` And where are you flying to ? '' 
`` If you know too much , you 'll get old too soon . '' 
`` Upon my word ! 
You are highly delighted ... I 've never seen you like this before . 
You are dressed up as if you were going to a ball . '' 
Rakitin looked her up and down . 
`` Much you know about balls . '' 
`` And do you know much about them ? '' 
`` I have seen a ball . 
The year before last , Kuzma Kuzmitch 's son was married and I looked on from the gallery . 
Do you suppose I want to be talking to you , Rakitin , while a prince like this is standing here . 
Such a visitor ! 
Alyosha , my dear boy , I gaze at you and ca n't believe my eyes . 
Good heavens , can you have come here to see me ! 
To tell you the truth , I never had a thought of seeing you and I did n't think that you would ever come and see me . 
Though this is not the moment now , I am awfully glad to see you . 
Sit down on the sofa , here , that 's right , my bright young moon . 
I really ca n't take it in even now ... . 
Eh , Rakitin , if only you had brought him yesterday or the day before ! 
But I am glad as it is ! 
Perhaps it 's better he has come now , at such a moment , and not the day before yesterday . '' 
She gaily sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa , looking at him with positive delight . 
And she really was glad , she was not lying when she said so . 
Her eyes glowed , her lips laughed , but it was a good-hearted merry laugh . 
Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in her face ... . 
He had hardly met her till the day before , he had formed an alarming idea of her , and had been horribly distressed the day before by the spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna . 
He was greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what he had expected . 
And , crushed as he was by his own sorrow , his eyes involuntarily rested on her with attention . 
Her whole manner seemed changed for the better since yesterday , there was scarcely any trace of that mawkish sweetness in her speech , of that voluptuous softness in her movements . 
Everything was simple and good-natured , her gestures were rapid , direct , confiding , but she was greatly excited . 
`` Dear me , how everything comes together to-day ! '' 
she chattered on again . 
`` And why I am so glad to see you , Alyosha , I could n't say myself ! 
If you ask me , I could n't tell you . '' 
`` Come , do n't you know why you 're glad ? '' 
said Rakitin , grinning . 
`` You used to be always pestering me to bring him , you 'd some object , I suppose . '' 
`` I had a different object once , but now that 's over , this is not the moment . 
I say , I want you to have something nice . 
I am so good-natured now . 
You sit down , too , Rakitin ; why are you standing ? 
You 've sat down already ? 
There 's no fear of Rakitin 's forgetting to look after himself . 
Look , Alyosha , he 's sitting there opposite us , so offended that I did n't ask him to sit down before you . 
Ugh , Rakitin is such a one to take offence ! '' 
laughed Grushenka . 
`` Do n't be angry , Rakitin , I 'm kind to-day . 
