Mihail Makarovitch was by no means very efficient in his work , though he performed his duties no worse than many others . 
To speak plainly , he was a man of rather narrow education . 
His understanding of the limits of his administrative power could not always be relied upon . 
It was not so much that he failed to grasp certain reforms enacted during the present reign , as that he made conspicuous blunders in his interpretation of them . 
This was not from any special lack of intelligence , but from carelessness , for he was always in to great a hurry to go into the subject . 
`` I have the heart of a soldier rather than of a civilian , '' he used to say of himself . 
He had not even formed a definite idea of the fundamental principles of the reforms connected with the emancipation of the serfs , and only picked it up , so to speak , from year to year , involuntarily increasing his knowledge by practice . 
And yet he was himself a landowner . 
Pyotr Ilyitch knew for certain that he would meet some of Mihail Makarovitch 's visitors there that evening , but he did n't know which . 
As it happened , at that moment the prosecutor , and Varvinsky , our district doctor , a young man , who had only just come to us from Petersburg after taking a brilliant degree at the Academy of Medicine , were playing whist at the police captain 's . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch , the prosecutor -LRB- he was really the deputy prosecutor , but we always called him the prosecutor -RRB- , was rather a peculiar man , of about five and thirty , inclined to be consumptive , and married to a fat and childless woman . 
He was vain and irritable , though he had a good intellect , and even a kind heart . 
It seemed that all that was wrong with him was that he had a better opinion of himself than his ability warranted . 
And that made him seem constantly uneasy . 
He had , moreover , certain higher , even artistic , leanings , towards psychology , for instance , a special study of the human heart , a special knowledge of the criminal and his crime . 
He cherished a grievance on this ground , considering that he had been passed over in the service , and being firmly persuaded that in higher spheres he had not been properly appreciated , and had enemies . 
In gloomy moments he even threatened to give up his post , and practise as a barrister in criminal cases . 
The unexpected Karamazov case agitated him profoundly : `` It was a case that might well be talked about all over Russia . '' 
But I am anticipating . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov , the young investigating lawyer , who had only come from Petersburg two months before , was sitting in the next room with the young ladies . 
People talked about it afterwards and wondered that all the gentlemen should , as though intentionally , on the evening of `` the crime '' have been gathered together at the house of the executive authority . 
Yet it was perfectly simple and happened quite naturally . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch 's wife had had toothache for the last two days , and he was obliged to go out to escape from her groans . 
The doctor , from the very nature of his being , could not spend an evening except at cards . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch Nelyudov had been intending for three days past to drop in that evening at Mihail Makarovitch 's , so to speak casually , so as slyly to startle the eldest granddaughter , Olga Mihailovna , by showing that he knew her secret , that he knew it was her birthday , and that she was trying to conceal it on purpose , so as not to be obliged to give a dance . 
He anticipated a great deal of merriment , many playful jests about her age , and her being afraid to reveal it , about his knowing her secret and telling everybody , and so on . 
The charming young man was a great adept at such teasing ; the ladies had christened him `` the naughty man , '' and he seemed to be delighted at the name . 
He was extremely well-bred , however , of good family , education and feelings , and , though leading a life of pleasure , his sallies were always innocent and in good taste . 
He was short , and delicate-looking . 
On his white , slender , little fingers he always wore a number of big , glittering rings . 
When he was engaged in his official duties , he always became extraordinarily grave , as though realising his position and the sanctity of the obligations laid upon him . 
He had a special gift for mystifying murderers and other criminals of the peasant class during interrogation , and if he did not win their respect , he certainly succeeded in arousing their wonder . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was simply dumbfounded when he went into the police captain 's . 
He saw instantly that everyone knew . 
They had positively thrown down their cards , all were standing up and talking . 
Even Nikolay Parfenovitch had left the young ladies and run in , looking strenuous and ready for action . 
Pyotr Ilyitch was met with the astounding news that old Fyodor Pavlovitch really had been murdered that evening in his own house , murdered and robbed . 
The news had only just reached them in the following manner : Marfa Ignatyevna , the wife of old Grigory , who had been knocked senseless near the fence , was sleeping soundly in her bed and might well have slept till morning after the draught she had taken . 
But , all of a sudden she waked up , no doubt roused by a fearful epileptic scream from Smerdyakov , who was lying in the next room unconscious . 
That scream always preceded his fits , and always terrified and upset Marfa Ignatyevna . 
She could never get accustomed to it . 
She jumped up and ran half-awake to Smerdyakov 's room . 
But it was dark there , and she could only hear the invalid beginning to gasp and struggle . 
Then Marfa Ignatyevna herself screamed out and was going to call her husband , but suddenly realised that when she had got up , he was not beside her in bed . 
She ran back to the bedstead and began groping with her hands , but the bed was really empty . 
Then he must have gone out where ? 
She ran to the steps and timidly called him . 
She got no answer , of course , but she caught the sound of groans far away in the garden in the darkness . 
She listened . 
The groans were repeated , and it was evident they came from the garden . 
`` Good Lord ! 
just as it was with Lizaveta Smerdyashtchaya ! '' 
she thought distractedly . 
She went timidly down the steps and saw that the gate into the garden was open . 
`` He must be out there , poor dear , '' she thought . 
She went up to the gate and all at once she distinctly heard Grigory calling her by name , Marfa ! 
Marfa ! '' 
in a weak , moaning , dreadful voice . 
`` Lord , preserve us from harm ! '' 
Marfa Ignatyevna murmured , and ran towards the voice , and that was how she found Grigory . 
But she found him not by the fence where he had been knocked down , but about twenty paces off . 
It appeared later , that he had crawled away on coming to himself , and probably had been a long time getting so far , losing consciousness several times . 
She noticed at once that he was covered with blood , and screamed at the top of her voice . 
Grigory was muttering incoherently : `` He has murdered ... his father murdered ... . 
Why scream , silly ... run ... fetch someone ... '' But Marfa continued screaming , and seeing that her master 's window was open and that there was a candle alight in the window , she ran there and began calling Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
But peeping in at the window , she saw a fearful sight . 
Her master was lying on his back , motionless , on the floor . 
His light-coloured dressing-gown and white shirt were soaked with blood . 
The candle on the table brightly lighted up the blood and the motionless dead face of Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Terror-stricken , Marfa rushed away from the window , ran out of the garden , drew the bolt of the big gate and ran headlong by the back way to the neighbour , Marya Konndratyevna . 
Both mother and daughter were asleep , but they waked up at Marfa 's desperate and persistent screaming and knocking at the shutter . 
Marfa , shrieking and screaming incoherently , managed to tell them the main fact , and to beg for assistance . 
It happened that Foma had come back from his wanderings and was staying the night with them . 
They got him up immediately and all three ran to the scene of the crime . 
On the way , Marya Kondratyevna remembered that at about eight o'clock she heard a dreadful scream from their garden , and this was no doubt Grigory 's scream , `` Parricide ! '' 
uttered when he caught hold of Mitya 's leg . 
`` Some one person screamed out and then was silent , '' Marya Kondratyevna explained as she ran . 
Running to the place where Grigory lay , the two women with the help of Foma carried him to the lodge . 
They lighted a candle and saw that Smerdyakov was no better , that he was writhing in convulsions , his eyes fixed in a squint , and that foam was flowing from his lips . 
They moistened Grigory 's forehead with water mixed with vinager , and the water revived him at once . 
He asked immediately : `` Is the master murdered ? '' 
Then Foma and both the women ran to the house and saw this time that not only the window , but also the door into the garden was wide open , though Fyodor Pavlovitch had for the last week locked himself in every night and did not allow even Grigory to come in on any pretext . 
Seeing that door open , they were afraid to go in to Fyodor Pavlovitch `` for fear anything should happen afterwards . '' 
And when they returned to Grigory , the old man told them to go straight to the police captain . 
Marya Kondratyevna ran there and gave the alarm to the whole party at the police captain 's . 
She arrived only five minutes before Pyotr Ilyitch , so that his story came , not as his own surmise and theory , but as the direct conformation by a witness , of the theory held by all , as to the identity of the criminal -LRB- a theory he had in the bottom of his heart refused to believe till that moment -RRB- . 
It was resolved to act with energy . 
The deputy police inspector of the town was commissioned to take four witnesses , to enter Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house and there to open an inquiry on the spot , according to the regular forms , which I will not go into here . 
The district doctor , a zealous man , new to his work , almost insisted on accompanying the police captain , the prosecutor , and the investigating lawyer . 
I will note briefly that Fyodor Pavlovitch was found to be quite dead , with his skull battered in . 
But with what ? 
Most likely with the same weapon with which Grigory had been attacked . 
And immediately that weapon was found , Grigory , to whom all possible medical assistance was at once given , described in a weak and breaking voice how he had been knocked down . 
They began looking with a lantern by the fence and found the brass pestle dropped in a most conspicuous place on the garden path . 
There were no signs of disturbance in the room where Fyodor Pavlovitch was lying . 
But by the bed , behind the screen , they picked up from the floor a big and thick envelope with the inscription : `` A present of three thousand roubles for my angel Grushenka , if she is willing to come . '' 
And below had been added by Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` For my little chicken . '' 
There were three seals of red sealing-wax on the envelope , but it had been torn open and was empty : the money had been removed . 
They found also on the floor a piece of narrow pink ribbon , with which the envelope had been tied up . 
One piece of Pyotr Ilyitch 's evidence made a great impression on the prosecutor and the investigating magistrate , namely , his idea that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would shoot himself before daybreak , that he had resolved to do so , had spoken of it to Ilyitch , had taken the pistols , loaded them before him , written a letter , put it in his pocket , etc. . 
