Twice I have confessed it . '' 
`` Have you been admitted to Communion ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I am afraid . 
I am afraid to die . '' 
`` Fear nothing and never be afraid ; and do n't fret . 
If only your penitence fail not , God will forgive all . 
There is no sin , and there can be no sin on all the earth , which the Lord will not forgive to the truly repentant ! 
Man can not commit a sin so great as to exhaust the infinite love of God . 
Can there be a sin which could exceed the love of God ? 
Think only of repentance , continual repentance , but dismiss fear altogether . 
Believe that God loves you as you can not conceive ; that He loves you with your sin , in your sin . 
It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner there is more joy in heaven than over ten righteous men . 
Go , and fear not . 
Be not bitter against men . 
Be not angry if you are wronged . 
Forgive the dead man in your heart what wrong he did you . 
Be reconciled with him in truth . 
If you are penitent , you love . 
And if you love you are of God . 
All things are atoned for , all things are saved by love . 
If I , a sinner , even as you are , am tender with you and have pity on you , how much more will God . 
Love is such a priceless treasure that you can redeem the whole world by it , and expiate not only your own sins but the sins of others . '' 
He signed her three times with the cross , took from his own neck a little ikon and put it upon her . 
She bowed down to the earth without speaking . 
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with a tiny baby in her arms . 
`` From Vyshegorye , dear Father . '' 
`` Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby . 
What do you want ? '' 
`` I 've come to look at you . 
I have been to you before - or have you forgotten ? 
You 've no great memory if you 've forgotten me . 
They told us you were ill . 
Thinks I , I 'll go and see him for myself . 
Now I see you , and you 're not ill ! 
You 'll live another twenty years . 
God bless you ! 
There are plenty to pray for you ; how should you be ill ? '' 
`` I thank you for all , daughter . '' 
`` By the way , I have a thing to ask , not a great one . 
Here are sixty copecks . 
Give them , dear Father , to someone poorer than me . 
I thought as I came along , better give through him . 
He 'll know whom to give to . '' 
`` Thanks , my dear , thanks ! 
You are a good woman . 
I love you . 
I will do so certainly . 
Is that your little girl ? '' 
`` My little girl , Father , Lizaveta . '' 
`` May the Lord bless you both , you and your babe Lizaveta ! 
You have gladdened my heart , mother . 
Farewell , dear children , farewell , dear ones . '' 
He blessed them all and bowed low to them . 
A Lady of Little Faith A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the peasants and his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped them away with her handkerchief . 
She was a sentimental society lady of genuinely good disposition in many respects . 
When the elder went up to her at last she met him enthusiastically . 
`` Ah , what I have been feeling , looking on at this touching scene ! 
... `` She could not go on for emotion . 
`` Oh , I understand the people 's love for you . 
I love the people myself . 
I want to love them . 
And who could help loving them , our splendid Russian people , so simple in their greatness ! '' 
`` How is your daughter 's health ? 
You wanted to talk to me again ? '' 
`` Oh , I have been urgently begging for it , I have prayed for it ! 
I was ready to fall on my knees and kneel for three days at your windows until you let me in . 
We have come , great healer , to express our ardent gratitude . 
You have healed my Lise , healed her completely , merely by praying over her last Thursday and laying your hands upon her . 
We have hastened here to kiss those hands , to pour out our feelings and our homage . '' 
`` What do you mean by healed ? 
But she is still lying down in her chair . '' 
`` But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday , '' said the lady with nervous haste . 
`` And that 's not all . 
Her legs are stronger . 
This mourning she got up well ; she had slept all night . 
Look at her rosy cheeks , her bright eyes ! 
She used to be always crying , but now she laughs and is gay and happy . 
This morning she insisted on my letting her stand up , and she stood up for a whole minute without any support . 
She wagers that in a fortnight she 'll be dancing a quadrille . 
I 've called in Doctor Herzenstube . 
He shrugged his shoulders and said , ' I am amazed ; I can make nothing of it . ' 
And would you have us not come here to disturb you , not fly here to thank you ? 
Lise , thank him - thank him ! '' 
Lise 's pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious . 
She rose in her chair as far as she could and , looking at the elder , clasped her hands before him , but could not restrain herself and broke into laughter . 
`` It 's at him , '' she said , pointing to Alyosha , with childish vexation at herself for not being able to repress her mirth . 
If anyone had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the elder , he would have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in an instant . 
His eyes shone and he looked down . 
`` She has a message for you , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
How are you ? '' 
the mother went on , holding out her exquisitely gloved hand to Alyosha . 
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at Alyosha . 
The latter went nearer to Lise and , smiling in a strangely awkward way , held out his hand to her too . 
Lise assumed an important air . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me . '' 
She handed him a little note . 
`` She particularly begs you to go and see her as soon as possible ; that you will not fail her , but will be sure to come . '' 
`` She asks me to go and see her ? 
Me ? 
