Mitya at first refused the glass that Nikolay Parfenovitch politely offered him , but afterwards he asked for it himself and drank it greedily . 
He looked surprisingly exhausted . 
It might have been supposed from his Herculean strength that one night of carousing , even accompanied by the most violent emotions , could have had little effect on him . 
But he felt that he could hardly hold his head up , and from time to time all the objects about him seemed heaving and dancing before his eyes . 
`` A little more and I shall begin raving , '' he said to himself . 
The Evidences of the Witnesses . 
The Babe THE examination of the witnesses began . 
But we will not continue our story in such detail as before . 
And so we will not dwell on how Nikolay Parfenovitch impressed on every witness called that he must give his evidence in accordance with truth and conscience , and that he would afterwards have to repeat his evidence on oath , how every witness was called upon to sign the protocol of his evidence , and so on . 
We will only note that the point principally insisted upon in the examination was the question of the three thousand roubles ; that is , was the sum spent here , at Mokroe , by Mitya on the first occasion , a month before , three thousand or fifteen hundred ? 
And again had he spent three thousand or fifteen hundred yesterday ? 
Alas , all the evidence given by everyone turned out to be against Mitya . 
There was not one in his favour , and some witnesses introduced new , almost crushing facts , in contradiction of his , Mitya 's , story . 
The first witness examined was Trifon Borissovitch . 
He was not in the least abashed as he stood before the lawyers . 
He had , on the contrary , an air of stern and severe indignation with the accused , which gave him an appearance of truthfulness and personal dignity . 
He spoke little , and with reserve , waited to be questioned , answered precisely and deliberately . 
Firmly and unhesitatingly he bore witness that the sum spent a month before could not have been less than three thousand , that all the peasants about here would testify that they had heard the sum of three thousand mentioned by Dmitri Fyodorovitch himself . 
`` What a lot of money he flung away on the Gypsy girls alone ! 
He wasted a thousand , I daresay , on them alone . '' 
`` I do n't believe I gave them five hundred , '' was Mitya 's gloomy comment on this . 
`` It 's a pity I did n't count the money at the time , but I was drunk ... '' Mitya was sitting sideways with his back to the curtains . 
He listened gloomily , with a melancholy and exhausted air , as though he would say : `` Oh , say what you like . 
It makes no difference now . '' 
`` More than a thousand went on them , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' retorted Trifon Borissovitch firmly . 
`` You flung it about at random and they picked it up . 
They were a rascally , thievish lot , horse-stealers , they 've been driven away from here , or maybe they 'd bear witness themselves how much they got from you . 
I saw the sum in your hands , myself - count it I did n't , you did n't let me , that 's true enough - but by the look of it I should say it was far more than fifteen hundred ... fifteen hundred , indeed ! 
We 've seen money too . 
We can judge of amounts ... '' As for the sum spent yesterday he asserted that Dmitri Fyodorovitch had told him , as soon as he arrived , that he had brought three thousand with him . 
`` Come now , is that so , Trifon Borissovitch ? '' 
replied Mitya . 
`` Surely I did n't declare so positively that I 'd brought three thousand ? '' 
`` You did say so , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You said it before Andrey . 
Andrey himself is still here . 
Send for him . 
And in the hall , when you were treating the chorus , you shouted straight out that you would leave your sixth thousand here - that is , with what you spent before , we must understand . 
Stepan and Semyon heard it , and Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov , too , was standing beside you at the time . 
Maybe he 'd remember it ... '' The evidence as to the `` sixth '' thousand made an extraordinary impression on the two lawyers . 
They were delighted with this new mode of reckoning ; three and three made six , three thousand then and three now made six , that was clear . 
They questioned all the peasants suggested by Trifon Borissovitch , Stepan and Semyon , the driver Andrey , and Kalganov . 
The peasants and the driver unhesitatingly confirmed Trifon Borissovitch 's evidence . 
They noted down , with particular care , Andrey 's account of the conversation he had had with Mitya on the road : '' ` Where , ' says he , ` am I , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , going , to heaven or to hell , and shall I be forgiven in the next world or not ? ' '' 
The psychological Ippolit Kirillovitch heard this with a subtle smile , and ended by recommending that these remarks as to where Dmitri Fyodorovitch would go should be `` included in the case . '' 
Kalganov , when called , came in reluctantly , frowning and ill-humoured , and he spoke to the lawyers as though he had never met them before in his life , though they were acquaintances whom he had been meeting every day for a long time past . 
He began by saying that `` he knew nothing about it and did n't want to . '' 
But it appeared that he had heard of the '' sixth '' thousand , and he admitted that he had been standing close by at the moment . 
As far as he could see he `` did n't know '' how much money Mitya had in his hands . 
He affirmed that the Poles had cheated at cards . 
In reply to reiterated questions he stated that , after the Poles had been turned out , Mitya 's position with Agrafena Alexandrovna had certainly improved , and that she had said that she loved him . 
He spoke of Agrafena Alexandrovna with reserve and respect , as though she had been a lady of the best society , and did not once allow himself to call her Grushenka . 
In spite of the young man 's obvious repugnance at giving evidence , Ippolit Kirillovitch examined him at great length , and only from him learnt all the details of what made up Mitya 's `` romance , '' so to say , on that night . 
Mitya did not once pull Kalganov up . 
At last they let the young man go , and he left the room with unconcealed indignation . 
The Poles , too , were examined . 
Though they had gone to bed in their room , they had not slept all night , and on the arrival of the police officers they hastily dressed and got ready , realising that they would certainly be sent for . 
They gave their evidence with dignity , though not without some uneasiness . 
The little Pole turned out to be a retired official of the twelfth class , who had served in Siberia as a veterinary surgeon . 
His name was Mussyalovitch . 
Pan Vrubelvsky turned out to be an uncertificated dentist . 
Although Nikolay Parfenovitch asked them questions on entering the room they both addressed their answers to Mihail Makarovitch , who was standing on one side , taking him in their ignorance for the most important person and in command , and addressed him at every word as `` Pan Colonel . '' 
Only after several reproofs from Mihail Makarovitch himself , they grasped that they had to address their answers to Nikolay Parfenovitch only . 
It turned out that they could speak Russian quite correctly except for their accent in some words . 
Of his relations with Grushenka , past and present , Pan Mussyalovitch spoke proudly and warmly , so that Mitya was roused at once and declared that he would not allow the `` scoundrel '' to speak like that in his presence ! 
Pan Mussyalovitch at once called attention to the word `` scoundrel , '' and begged that it should be put down in the protocol . 
Mitya fumed with rage . 
`` He 's a scoundrel ! 
A scoundrel ! 
You can put that down . 
And put down , too , that , in spite of the protocol I still declare that he 's a scoundrel ! '' 
he cried . 
Though Nikolay Parfenovitch did insert this in the protocol , he showed the most praiseworthy tact and management . 
After sternly reprimanding Mitya , he cut short all further inquiry into the romantic aspect of the case , and hastened to pass to what was essential . 
One piece of evidence given by the Poles roused special interest in the lawyers : that was how , in that very room , Mitya had tried to buy off Pan Mussyalovitch , and had offered him three thousand roubles to resign his claims , seven hundred roubles down , and the remaining two thousand three hundred `` to be paid next day in the town . '' 
He had sworn at the time that he had not the whole sum with him at Mokroe , but that his money was in the town . 
Mitya observed hotly that he had not said that he would be sure to pay him the remainder next day in the town . 
But Pan Vrublevsky confirmed the statement , and Mitya , after thinking for a moment admitted , frowning , that it must have been as the Poles stated , that he had been excited at the time , and might indeed have said so . 
The prosecutor positively pounced on this piece of evidence . 
It seemed to establish for the prosecution -LRB- and they did , in fact , base this deduction on it -RRB- that half , or a part of , the three thousand that had come into Mitya 's hands might really have been left somewhere hidden in the town , or even , perhaps , somewhere here , in Mokroe . 
This would explain the circumstance , so baffling for the prosecution , that only eight hundred roubles were to be found in Mitya 's hands . 
This circumstance had been the one piece of evidence which , insignificant as it was , had hitherto told , to some extent , in Mitya 's favour . 
Now this one piece of evidence in his favour had broken down . 
In answer to the prosecutor 's inquiry , where he would have got the remaining two thousand three hundred roubles , since he himself had denied having more than fifteen hundred , Mitya confidently replied that he had meant to offer the `` little chap , '' not money , but a formal deed of conveyance of his rights to the village of Tchermashnya , those rights which he had already offered to Samsonov and Madame Hohlakov . 
The prosecutor positively smiled at the `` innocence of this subterfuge . '' 
`` And you imagine he would have accepted such a deed as a substitute for two thousand three hundred roubles in cash ? '' 
`` He certainly would have accepted it , '' Mitya declared warmly . 
`` Why , look here , he might have grabbed not two thousand , but four or six , for it . 
He would have put his lawyers , Poles and Jews , on to the job , and might have got , not three thousand , but the whole property out of the old man . '' 
The evidence of Pan Mussyalovitch was , of course , entered in the protocol in the fullest detail . 
Then they let the Poles go . 
The incident of the cheating at cards was hardly touched upon . 
Nikolay Parfenovitch was too well pleased with them , as it was , and did not want to worry them with trifles , moreover , it was nothing but a foolish , drunken quarrel over cards . 
There had been drinking and disorder enough , that night ... . 
So the two hundred roubles remained in the pockets of the Poles . 
Then old Maximov was summoned . 
He came in timidly , approached with little steps , looking very dishevelled and depressed . 
He had , all this time , taken refuge below with Grushenka , sitting dumbly beside her , and `` now and then he 'd begin blubbering over her and wiping his eyes with a blue check handkerchief , '' as Mihail Makarovitch described afterwards . 
So that she herself began trying to pacify and comfort him . 
The old man at once confessed that he had done wrong , that he had borrowed `` ten roubles in my poverty , '' from Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that he was ready to pay it back . 
