- -LRB- I 'm being abusive , that 's stupid . -RRB- 
Not for scoundrels , but for pedantic poseurs , ` haunted by profound , unsolved doubts . ' 
He 's showing off , and what it all comes to is , ` on the one hand we can not but admit ' and ` on the other it must be confessed ! ' 
His whole theory is a fraud ! 
Humanity will find in itself the power to live for virtue even without believing in immortality . 
It will find it in love for freedom , for equality , for fraternity . '' 
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat , but , suddenly , as though remembering something , he stopped short . 
`` Well , that 's enough , '' he said , with a still more crooked smile . 
`` Why are you laughing ? 
Do you think I 'm a vulgar fool ? '' 
`` No , I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool . 
You are clever but ... never mind , I was silly to smile . 
I understand your getting hot about it , Misha . 
I guess from your warmth that you are not indifferent to Katerina Ivanovna yourself ; I 've suspected that for a long time , brother , that 's why you do n't like my brother Ivan . 
Are you jealous of him ? '' 
`` And jealous of her money , too ? 
Wo n't you add that ? '' 
`` I 'll say nothing about money . 
I am not going to insult you . '' 
`` I believe it , since you say so , but confound you , and your brother Ivan with you . 
Do n't you understand that one might very well dislike him , apart from Katerina Ivanovna . 
And why the devil should I like him ? 
He condescends to abuse me , you know . 
Why have n't I a right to abuse him ? '' 
`` I never heard of his saying anything about you , good or bad . 
He does n't speak of you at all . '' 
`` But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna 's he was abusing me for all he was worth - you see what an interest he takes in your humble servant . 
And which is the jealous one after that , brother , I ca n't say . 
He was so good as to express the opinion that , if I do n't go in for the career of an archimandrite in the immediate future and do n't become a monk , I shall be sure to go to Petersburg and get on to some solid magazine as a reviewer , that I shall write for the next ten years , and in the end become the owner of the magazine , and bring it out on the liberal and atheistic side , with a socialistic tinge , with a tiny gloss of socialism , but keeping a sharp lookout all the time , that is , keeping in with both sides and hoodwinking the fools . 
According to your brother 's account , the tinge of socialism wo n't hinder me from laying by the proceeds and investing them under the guidance of some Jew , till at the end of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my publishing offices to it , and let out the upper stories to lodgers . 
He has even chosen the place for it , near the new stone bridge across the Neva , which they say is to be built in Petersburg . '' 
`` Ah , Misha , that 's just what will really happen , every word of it , '' cried Alyosha , unable to restrain a good-humoured smile . 
`` You are pleased to be sarcastic , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` No , no , I 'm joking , forgive me . 
I 've something quite different in my mind . 
But , excuse me , who can have told you all this ? 
You ca n't have been at Katerina Ivanovna 's yourself when he was talking about you ? '' 
`` I was n't there , but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was ; and I heard him tell it with my own ears ; if you want to know , he did n't tell me , but I overheard him , unintentionally , of course , for I was sitting in Grushenka 's bedroom and I could n't go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch was in the next room . '' 
`` Oh yes , I 'd forgotten she was a relation of yours . '' 
`` A relation ! 
That Grushenka a relation of mine ! '' 
cried Rakitin , turning crimson . 
`` Are you mad ? 
You 're out of your mind ! '' 
`` Why , is n't she a relation of yours ? 
I heard so . '' 
`` Where can you have heard it ? 
You Karamazovs brag of being an ancient , noble family , though your father used to run about playing the buffoon at other men 's tables , and was only admitted to the kitchen as a favour . 
I may be only a priest 's son , and dirt in the eyes of noblemen like you , but do n't insult me so lightly and wantonly . 
I have a sense of honour , too , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I could n't be a relation of Grushenka , a common harlot . 
I beg you to understand that ! '' 
Rakitin was intensely irritated . 
`` Forgive me , for goodness ' sake , I had no idea ... besides ... how can you call her a harlot ? 
Is she ... that sort of woman ? '' 
Alyosha flushed suddenly . 
`` I tell you again , I heard that she was a relation of yours . 
You often go to see her , and you told me yourself you 're not her lover . 
I never dreamed that you of all people had such contempt for her ! 
Does she really deserve it ? '' 
`` I may have reasons of my own for visiting her . 
That 's not your business . 
But as for relationship , your brother , or even your father , is more likely to make her yours than mine . 
Well , here we are . 
You 'd better go to the kitchen . 
Hullo ! 
what 's wrong , what is it ? 
Are we late ? 
They ca n't have finished dinner so soon ! 
Have the Karamazovs been making trouble again ? 
No doubt they have . 
Here 's your father and your brother Ivan after him . 
They 've broken out from the Father Superior 's . 
And look , Father Isidor 's shouting out something after them from the steps . 
And your father 's shouting and waving his arms . 
I expect he 's swearing . 
Bah , and there goes Miusov driving away in his carriage . 
You see , he 's going . 
And there 's old Maximov running ! 
- there must have been a row . 
There ca n't have been any dinner . 
Surely they 've not been beating the Father Superior ! 
Or have they , perhaps , been beaten ? 
It would serve them right ! '' 
There was reason for Rakitin 's exclamations . 
There had been a scandalous , an unprecedented scene . 
It had all come from the impulse of a moment . 
The Scandalous Scene MIUSOV , as a man of breeding and delicacy , could not but feel some inward qualms , when he reached the Father Superior 's with Ivan : he felt ashamed of having lost his temper . 
He felt that he ought to have disdained that despicable wretch , Fyodor Pavlovitch , too much to have been upset by him in Father Zossima 's cell , and so to have forgotten himself . 
`` The monks were not to blame , in any case , '' he reflected , on the steps . 
`` And if they 're decent people here -LRB- and the Father Superior , I understand , is a nobleman -RRB- why not be friendly and courteous with them ? 
I wo n't argue , I 'll fall in with everything , I 'll win them by politeness , and ... and ... show them that I 've nothing to do with that Aesop , that buffoon , that Pierrot , and have merely been taken in over this affair , just as they have . '' 
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery , and relinquish his claims to the wood-cutting and fishery rights at once . 
He was the more ready to do this because the rights had become much less valuable , and he had indeed the vaguest idea where the wood and river in question were . 
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the Father Superior 's dining-room , though , strictly speaking , it was not a dining-room , for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether ; they were , however , much larger and more comfortable than Father Zossima 's . 
But there was no great luxury about the furnishing of these rooms either . 
The furniture was of mahogany , covered with leather , in the old-fashioned style of 1820 the floor was not even stained , but everything was shining with cleanliness , and there were many choice flowers in the windows ; the most sumptuous thing in the room at the moment was , of course , the beautifully decorated table . 
The cloth was clean , the service shone ; there were three kinds of well-baked bread , two bottles of wine , two of excellent mead , and a large glass jug of kvas - both the latter made in the monastery , and famous in the neighbourhood . 
There was no vodka . 
Rakitin related afterwards that there were five dishes : fish-soup made of sterlets , served with little fish patties ; then boiled fish served in a special way ; then salmon cutlets , ice pudding and compote , and finally , blanc-mange . 
Rakitin found out about all these good things , for he could not resist peeping into the kitchen , where he already had a footing . 
