Aie ! 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , darling , I 'll tell you everything directly , I wo n't hide anything , '' gabbled Fenya , frightened to death ; `` she 's gone to Mokroe , to her officer . '' 
`` What officer ? '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` To her officer , the same one she used to know , the one who threw her over five years ago , '' cackled Fenya , as fast as she could speak . 
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat . 
He stood facing her , pale as death , unable to utter a word , but his eyes showed that he realised it all , all , from the first word , and guessed the whole position . 
Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not . 
She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room , trembling all over , holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself . 
She seemed to have grown rigid in that position . 
Her wide-opened , scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him . 
And to make matters worse , both his hands were smeared with blood . 
On the way , as he ran , he must have touched his forehead with them , wiping off the perspiration , so that on his forehead and his right cheek were bloodstained patches . 
Fenya was on the verge of hysterics . 
The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman , almost unconscious with terror . 
Mitya stood for a moment , then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya . 
He sat , not reflecting but , as it were , terror-stricken , benumbed . 
Yet everything was clear as day : that officer , he knew about him , he knew everything perfectly , he had known it from Grushenka herself , had known that a letter had come from him a month before . 
So that for a month , for a whole month , this had been going on , a secret from him , till the very arrival of this new man , and he had never thought of him ! 
But how could he , how could he not have thought of him ? 
Why was it he had forgotten this officer , like that , forgotten him as soon as he heard of him ? 
That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing . 
And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror , growing cold with horror . 
But suddenly , as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child , he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now . 
He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness , astonishing in his position , and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands , she , too , with wonderful readiness and rapidity , answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him . 
Little by little , even with a sort of enjoyment , she began explaining every detail , not wanting to torment him , but , as it were , eager to be of the utmost service to him . 
She described the whole of that day , in great detail , the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha , how she , Fenya , had stood on the watch , how the mistress had set off , and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him , Mitya , her greetings , and to tell him `` to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour . '' 
Hearing of the message , Mitya suddenly smiled , and there was a flush of colour on his pale cheeks . 
At the same moment Fenya said to him , not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive : `` Look at your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 're all over blood ! 
`` Yes , '' answered Mitya mechanically . 
He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya 's question . 
He sank into silence again . 
Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in . 
His first horror was over , but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him . 
He suddenly stood up , smiling dreamily . 
`` What has happened to you , sir ? '' 
said Fenya , pointing to his hands again . 
She spoke compassionately , as though she felt very near to him now in his grief . 
Mitya looked at his hands again . 
`` That 's blood , Fenya , '' he said , looking at her with a strange expression . 
`` That 's human blood , and my God ! 
why was it shed ? 
But ... Fenya ... there 's a fence here '' -LRB- he looked at her as though setting her a riddle -RRB- , `` a high fence , and terrible to look at . 
But at dawn to-morrow , when the sun rises , Mitya will leap over that fence ... . 
You do n't understand what fence , Fenya , and , never mind ... . 
You 'll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now , good-bye . 
I wo n't stand in her way . 
I 'll step aside , I know how to step aside . 
Live , my joy ... . 
You loved me for an hour , remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever ... . 
She always used to call me Mityenka , do you remember ? '' 
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen . 
Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her . 
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin , the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols . 
It was by now half-past eight , and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea , and had just put his coat on again to go to the Metropolis to play billiards . 
Mitya caught him coming out . 
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood , the young man uttered a cry of surprise . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What is the matter ? '' 
`` I 've come for my pistols , '' said Mitya , `` and brought you the money . 
And thanks very much . 
I 'm in a hurry , Pyotr Ilyitch , please make haste . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised ; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of banknotes in Mitya 's hand , and what was more , he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money : he had them in his right hand , and held them outstretched as if to show them . 
Perhotin 's servant-boy , who met Mitya in the passage , said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way , with the money outstretched in his hand , so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets . 
They were all rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes , and the fingers holding them were covered with blood . 
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money , he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance , but that it might have been two thousand , or perhaps three , but it was a big , `` fat '' bundle . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' so he testified afterwards , `` seemed unlike himself , too ; not drunk , but , as it were , exalted , lost to everything , but at the same time , as it were , absorbed , as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision . 
He was in great haste , answered abruptly and very strangely , and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful . '' 
`` But what is the matter with you ? 
What 's wrong ? '' 
cried Pyotr Ilyitch , looking wildly at his guest . 
`` How is it that you 're all covered with blood ? 
Have you had a fall ? 
Look at yourself ! '' 
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass . 
Seeing his blood-stained face , Mitya started and scowled wrathfully . 
`` Damnation ! 
That 's the last straw , '' he muttered angrily , hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left , and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket . 
But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood , too -LRB- it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory 's face -RRB- . 
There was scarcely a white spot on it , and it had not merely begun to dry , but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart . 
Mitya threw it angrily on the floor . 
`` Oh , damn it ! '' 
he said . 
`` Have n't you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my face ? '' 
`` So you 're only stained , not wounded ? 
You 'd better wash , '' said Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Here 's a wash-stand . 
I 'll pour you out some water . '' 
`` A wash-stand ? 
That 's all right ... but where am I to put this ? '' 
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes , looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he , Mitya , was to do with his own money . 
`` In your pocket , or on the table here . 
They wo n't be lost . '' 
`` In my pocket ? 
Yes , in my pocket . 
All right ... . 
But , I say , that 's all nonsense , '' he cried , as though suddenly coming out of his absorption . 
`` Look here , let 's first settle that business of the pistols . 
Give them back to me . 
