`` He 's alone , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Where are you ? '' 
cried the old man again ; and he thrust his head out farther , thrust it out to the shoulders , gazing in all directions , right and left . 
`` Come here , I 've a little present for you . 
Come , I 'll show you ... '' `` He means the three thousand , '' thought Mitya . 
`` But where are you ? 
Are you at the door ? 
I 'll open it directly . '' 
And the old man almost climbed out of the window , peering out to the right , where there was a door into the garden , trying to see into the darkness . 
In another second he would certainly have run out to open the door without waiting for Grushenka 's answer . 
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring . 
The old man 's profile that he loathed so , his pendent Adam 's apple , his hooked nose , his lips that smiled in greedy expectation , were all brightly lighted up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room . 
A horrible fury of hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya 's heart : `` There he was , his rival , the man who had tormented him , had ruined his life ! '' 
It was a rush of that sudden , furious , revengeful anger of which he had spoken , as though foreseeing it , to Alyosha , four days ago in the arbour , when , in answer to Alyosha 's question , `` How can you say you 'll kill our father ? '' 
`` I do n't know , I do n't know , '' he had said then . 
`` Perhaps I shall not kill him , perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid he 'll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that moment . 
I hate his double chin , his nose , his eyes , his shameless grin . 
I feel a personal repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of , that 's what may be too much for me . '' 
... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable . 
Mitya was beside himself , he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his pocket . 
`` God was watching over me then , '' Mitya himself said afterwards . 
At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness . 
Earlier in the evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan . 
He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret , very strong decoction , had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife repeated a `` certain prayer '' over him , after which he had gone to bed . 
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff , too , and , being unused to strong drink , slept like the dead beside her husband . 
But Grigory waked up in the night , quite suddenly , and , after a moment 's reflection , though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back , he sat up in bed . 
Then he deliberated again , got up and dressed hurriedly . 
Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was unguarded `` in such perilous times . '' 
Smerdyakov , exhausted by his fit , lay motionless in the next room . 
Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir . 
`` The stuff 's been too much for the woman , '' Grigory thought , glancing at her , and groaning , he went out on the steps . 
No doubt he only intended to look out from the steps , for he was hardly able to walk , the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable . 
But he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate into the garden that evening . 
He was the most punctual and precise of men , a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine , and habits that lasted for years . 
Limping and writhing with pain he went down the steps and towards the garden . 
Yes , the gate stood wide open . 
Mechanically he stepped into the garden . 
Perhaps he fancied something , perhaps caught some sound , and , glancing to the left he saw his master 's window open . 
No one was looking out of it then . 
`` What 's it open for ? 
It 's not summer now , '' thought Grigory , and suddenly , at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden . 
Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running in the dark , a sort of shadow was moving very fast . 
`` Good Lord ! '' 
cried Grigory beside himself , and forgetting the pain in his back , he hurried to intercept the running figure . 
He took a short cut , evidently he knew the garden better ; the flying figure went towards the bath-house , ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence . 
Grigory followed , not losing sight of him , and ran , forgetting everything . 
He reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it . 
Grigory cried out , beside himself , pounced on him , and clutched his leg in his two hands . 
Yes , his foreboding had not deceived him . 
He recognised him ; it was he , the `` monster , '' the `` parricide . '' 
`` Parricide ! 
the old man shouted so that the whole neighbourhood could hear , but he had not time to shout more , he fell at once , as though struck by lightning . 
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man . 
In Mitya 's hands was a brass pestle , and he flung it mechanically in the grass . 
The pestle fell two paces from Grigory , not in the grass but on the path , in a most conspicuous place . 
For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure before him . 
The old man 's head was covered with blood . 
Mitya put out his hand and began feeling it . 
He remembered afterwards clearly that he had been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man 's skull , or simply stunned him with the pestle . 
But the blood was flowing horribly ; and in a moment Mitya 's fingers were drenched with the hot stream . 
He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame Hohlakov , and putting it to the old man 's head , senselessly trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples . 
But the handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What am I doing it for ? '' 
thought Mitya , suddenly pulling himself together . 
`` If I have broken his skull , how can I find out now ? 
And what difference does it make now ? '' 
he added , hopelessly . 
`` If I 've killed him , I 've killed him ... . 
You 've come to grief , old man , so there you must lie ! '' 
he said aloud . 
And suddenly turning to the fence , he vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running - the handkerchief soaked with blood he held , crushed up in his right fist , and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his coat . 
He ran headlong , and the few passers-by who met him in the dark , in the streets , remembered afterwards that they had met a man running that night . 
He flew back again to the widow Morozov 's house . 
Immediately after he had left it that evening , Fenya had rushed to the chief porter , Nazar Ivanovitch , and besought him , for Christ 's sake , `` not to let the captain in again to-day or to-morrow . '' 
Nazar Ivanovitch promised , but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him , and meeting his nephew , a boy of twenty , who had recently come from the country , on the way up told him to take his place , but forgot to mention `` the captain . '' 
Mitya , running up to the gate , knocked . 
The lad instantly recognised him , for Mitya had more than once tipped him . 
Opening the gate at once , he let him in , and hastened to inform him with a good-humoured smile that `` Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now , you know . '' 
`` Where is she then , Prohor ? '' 
asked Mitya , stopping short . 
`` She set off this evening , some two hours ago , with Timofey , to Mokroe . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` That I ca n't say . 
To see some officer . 
Someone invited her and horses were sent to fetch her . '' 
Mitya left him , and ran like a madman to Fenya . 
A Sudden Resolution SHE was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother ; they were both just going to bed . 
Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch , they had not locked themselves in . 
Mitya ran in , pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat . 
`` Speak at once ! 
Where is she ? 
With whom is she now , at Mokroe ? '' 
he roared furiously . 
Both the women squealed . 
`` Aie ! 
I 'll tell you . 
