I 'm not ` old fellow ' to you , and you can keep your advice for another time ! '' 
Mavriky Mavrikyevitch snapped out savagely , as though glad to vent his wrath . 
Mitya was reduced to silence . 
He flushed all over . 
A moment later he felt suddenly very cold . 
The rain had ceased , but the dull sky was still overcast with clouds , and a keen wind was blowing straight in his face . 
`` I 've taken a chill , '' thought Mitya , twitching his shoulders . 
At last Mavriky Mavrikyevitch , too , got into the cart , sat down heavily , and , as though without noticing it , squeezed Mitya into the corner . 
It is true that he was out of humour and greatly disliked the task that had been laid upon him . 
`` Good-bye , Trifon Borissovitch ! '' 
Mitya shouted again , and felt himself , that he had not called out this time from good-nature , but involuntarily , from resentment . 
But Trifon Borissovitch stood proudly , with both hands behind his back , and staring straight at Mitya with a stern and angry face , he made no reply . 
`` Good-bye , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , good-bye ! '' 
he heard all at once the voice of Kalganov , who had suddenly darted out . 
Running up to the cart he held out his hand to Mitya . 
He had no cap on . 
Mitya had time to seize and press his hand . 
`` Good-bye , dear fellow ! 
I sha n't forget your generosity , '' he cried warmly . 
But the cart moved and their hands parted . 
The bell began ringing and Mitya was driven off . 
Kalganov ran back , sat down in a corner , bent his head , hid his face in his hands , and burst out crying . 
For a long while he sat like that , crying as though he were a little boy instead of a young man of twenty . 
Oh , he believed almost without doubt in Mitya 's guilt . 
`` What are these people ? 
What can men be after this ? '' 
he exclaimed incoherently , in bitter despondency , almost despair . 
At that moment he had no desire to live . 
`` Is it worth it ? 
Is it worth it ? '' 
exclaimed the boy in his grief . 
Kolya Krassotkin IT was the beginning of November . 
There had been a hard frost , eleven degrees Reaumur , without snow , but a little dry snow had fallen on the frozen ground during the night , and a keen dry wind was lifting and blowing it along the dreary streets of our town , especially about the market-place . 
It was a dull morning , but the snow had ceased . 
Not far from the market-place , close to Plotnikov 's shop , there stood a small house , very clean both without and within . 
It belonged to Madame Krassotkin , the widow of a former provincial secretary , who had been dead for fourteen years . 
His widow , still a nice-looking woman of thirty-two , was living in her neat little house on her private means . 
She lived in respectable seclusion ; she was of a soft but fairly cheerful disposition . 
She was about eighteen at the time of her husband 's death ; she had been married only a year and had just borne him a son . 
From the day of his death she had devoted herself heart and soul to the bringing up of her precious treasure , her boy Kolya . 
Though she had loved him passionately those fourteen years , he had caused her far more suffering than happiness . 
She had been trembling and fainting with terror almost every day , afraid he would fall ill , would catch cold , do something naughty , climb on a chair and fall off it , and so on and so on . 
When Kolya began going to school , the mother devoted herself to studying all the sciences with him so as to help him , and go through his lessons with him . 
She hastened to make the acquaintance of the teachers and their wives , even made up to Kolya 's schoolfellows , and fawned upon them in the hope of thus saving Kolya from being teased , laughed at , or beaten by them . 
She went so far that the boys actually began to mock at him on her account and taunt him with being a `` mother 's darling . '' 
But the boy could take his own part . 
He was a resolute boy , `` tremendously strong , '' as was rumoured in his class , and soon proved to be the fact ; he was agile , strong-willed , and of an audacious and enterprising temper . 
He was good at lessons , and there was a rumour in the school that he could beat the teacher , Dardanelov , at arithmetic and universal history . 
Though he looked down upon everyone , he was a good comrade and not supercilious . 
He accepted his schoolfellows ' respect as his due , but was friendly with them . 
Above all , he knew where to draw the line . 
He could restrain himself on occasion , and in his relations with the teachers he never overstepped that last mystic limit beyond which a prank becomes an unpardonable breach of discipline . 
But he was as fond of mischief on every possible occasion as the smallest boy in the school , and not so much for the sake of mischief as for creating a sensation , inventing something , something effective and conspicuous . 
He was extremely vain . 
He knew how to make even his mother give way to him ; he was almost despotic in his control of her . 
She gave way to him , oh , she had given way to him for years . 
The one thought unendurable to her was that her boy had no great love for her . 
She was always fancying that Kolya was `` unfeeling '' to her , and at times , dissolving into hysterical tears , she used to reproach him with his coldness . 
The boy disliked this , and the more demonstrations of feeling were demanded of him , the more he seemed intentionally to avoid them . 
Yet it was not intentional on his part but instinctive - it was his character . 
His mother was mistaken ; he was very fond of her . 
He only disliked `` sheepish sentimentality , '' as he expressed it in his schoolboy language . 
There was a bookcase in the house containing a few books that had been his father 's . 
Kolya was fond of reading , and had read several of them by himself . 
His mother did not mind that and only wondered sometimes at seeing the boy stand for hours by the bookcase poring over a book instead of going to play . 
And in that way Kolya read some things unsuitable for his age . 
Though the boy , as a rule , knew where to draw the line in his mischief , he had of late begun to play pranks that caused his mother serious alarm . 
It is true there was nothing vicious in what he did , but a wild mad recklessness . 
It happened that July , during the summer holidays , that the mother and son went to another district , forty-five miles away , to spend a week with a distant relation , whose husband was an official at the railway station -LRB- the very station , the nearest one to our town , from which a month later Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov set off for Moscow -RRB- . 
There Kolya began by carefully investigating every detail connected with the railways , knowing that he could impress his schoolfellows when he got home with his newly acquired knowledge . 
But there happened to be some other boys in the place with whom he soon made friends . 
Some of them were living at the station , others in the neighbourhood ; there were six or seven of them , all between twelve and fifteen , and two of them came from our town . 
The boys played together , and on the fourth or fifth day of Kolya 's stay at the station , a mad bet was made by the foolish boys . 
Kolya , who was almost the youngest of the party and rather looked down upon by the others in consequence , was moved by vanity or by reckless bravado to bet them two roubles that he would lie down between the rails at night when the eleven o'clock train was due , and would lie there without moving while the train rolled over him at full speed . 
It is true they made a preliminary investigation , from which it appeared that it was possible to lie so flat between the rails that the train could pass over without touching , but to lie there was no joke ! 
Kolya maintained stoutly that he would . 
At first they laughed at him , called him a little liar , a braggart , but that only egged him on . 
What piqued him most was that these boys of fifteen turned up their noses at him too superciliously , and were at first disposed to treat him as `` a small boy , '' not fit to associate with them , and that was an unendurable insult . 
And so it was resolved to go in the evening , half a mile from the station , so that the train might have time to get up full speed after leaving the station The boys assembled . 
It was a pitch-dark night without a moon . 
At the time fixed , Kolya lay down between the rails . 
The five others who had taken the bet waited among the bushes below the embankment , their hearts beating with suspense , which was followed by alarm and remorse . 
At last they heard in the distance the rumble of the train leaving the station . 
Two red lights gleamed out of the darkness ; the monster roared as it approached . 
`` Run , run away from the rails , '' the boys cried to Kolya from the bushes , breathless with terror . 
But it was too late : the train darted up and flew past . 
The boys rushed to Kolya . 
He lay without moving . 
They began pulling at him , lifting him up . 
He suddenly got up and walked away without a word . 
Then he explained that he had lain there as though he were insensible to frighten them , but the fact was that he really had lost consciousness , as he confessed long after to his mother . 
In this way his reputation as `` a desperate character , '' was established for ever . 
He returned home to the station as white as a sheet . 
Next day he had a slight attack of nervous fever , but he was in high spirits and well pleased with himself . 
The incident did not become known at once , but when they came back to the town it penetrated to the school and even reached the ears of the masters . 
But then Kolya 's mother hastened to entreat the masters on her boy 's behalf , and in the end Dardanelov , a respected and influential teacher , exerted himself in his favour , and the affair was ignored . 
Dardanelov was a middle-aged bachelor , who had been passionately in love with Madame Krassotkin for many years past , and had once already , about a year previously , ventured , trembling with fear and the delicacy of his sentiments , to offer her most respectfully his hand in marriage . 
But she refused him resolutely , feeling that to accept him would be an act of treachery to her son , though Dardanelov had , to judge from certain mysterious symptoms , reason for believing that he was not an object of aversion to the charming but too chaste and tender-hearted widow . 
Kolya 's mad prank seemed to have broken the ice , and Dardanelov was rewarded for his intercession by a suggestion of hope . 
The suggestion , it is true , was a faint one , but then Dardanelov was such a paragon of purity and delicacy that it was enough for the time being to make him perfectly happy . 
