But without giving the terror-stricken Fenya time to utter a word , he fell all of a heap at her feet . 
`` Fenya , for Christ 's sake , tell me , where is she ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear , I do n't know . 
You may kill me but I ca n't tell you . '' 
Fenya swore and protested . 
`` You went out with her yourself not long ago - '' `` She came back ! '' 
`` Indeed she did n't . 
By God I swear she did n't come back . '' 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
shouted Mitya . 
`` From your terror I know where she is . '' 
He rushed away . 
Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily . 
But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste , or she might not have fared so well . 
But as he ran , he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by an unexpected action . 
On the table stood a brass mortar , with a pestle in it , a small brass pestle , not much more than six inches long . 
Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when , with the other , he snatched up the pestle , and thrust it in his side-pocket . 
`` Oh Lord ! 
He 's going to murder someone ! '' 
cried Fenya , flinging up her hands . 
In the Dark WHERE was he running ? 
`` Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov 's , that was clear now . 
The whole intrigue , the whole deceit was evident . '' 
... It all rushed whirling through his mind . 
He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna 's . 
`` There was no need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell directly ... . 
Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the plot , Smerdyakov too , he too , all had been bought over ! '' 
He formed another plan of action : he ran a long way round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house , crossing the lane , running down Dmitrovsky Street , then over the little bridge , and so came straight to the deserted alley at the back , which was empty and uninhabited , with , on one side the hurdle fence of a neighbour 's kitchen-garden , on the other the strong high fence that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
Here he chose a spot , apparently the very place , where according to the tradition , he knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it : `` If she could climb over it , '' the thought , God knows why , occurred to him , `` surely I can . '' 
He did in fact jump up , and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence . 
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it . 
Close by , in the garden stood the bathhouse , but from the fence he could see the lighted windows of the house too . 
`` Yes , the old man 's bedroom is lighted up . 
She 's there ! 
and he leapt from the fence into the garden . 
Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov , too , and that there was no one to hear him , he instinctively hid himself , stood still , and began to listen . 
But there was dead silence on all sides and , as though of design , complete stillness , not the slightest breath of wind . 
`` And naught but the whispering silence , '' the line for some reason rose to his mind . 
`` If only no one heard me jump over the fence ! 
I think not . '' 
Standing still for a minute , he walked softly over the grass in the garden , avoiding the trees and shrubs . 
He walked slowly , creeping stealthily at every step , listening to his own footsteps . 
It took him five minutes to reach the lighted window . 
He remembered that just under the window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam . 
The door from the house into the garden on the left-hand side was shut ; he had carefully looked on purpose to see , in passing . 
At last he reached the bushes and hid behind them . 
He held his breath . 
`` I must wait now , '' he thought , `` to reassure them , in case they heard my footsteps and are listening ... if only I do n't cough or sneeze . '' 
He waited two minutes . 
His heart was beating violently , and , at moments , he could scarcely breathe . 
`` No , this throbbing at my heart wo n't stop , '' he thought . 
`` I ca n't wait any longer . '' 
He was standing behind a bush in the shadow . 
The light of the window fell on the front part of the bush . 
`` How red the whitebeam berries are ! '' 
he murmured , not knowing why . 
Softly and noiselessly , step by step , he approached the window , and raised himself on tiptoe . 
All Fyodor Pavlovitch 's bedroom lay open before him . 
It was not a large room , and was divided in two parts by a red screen , `` Chinese , '' as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it . 
The word `` Chinese '' flashed into Mitya 's mind , `` and behind the screen , is Grushenka , '' thought Mitya . 
He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch who was wearing his new striped-silk dressing-gown , which Mitya had never seen , and a silk cord with tassels round the waist . 
A clean , dandified shirt of fine linen with gold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing-gown . 
On his head Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen . 
`` He has got himself up , '' thought Mitya . 
His father was standing near the window , apparently lost in thought . 
Suddenly he jerked up his head , listened a moment , and hearing nothing went up to the table , poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanter and drank it off . 
Then he uttered a deep sigh , again stood still a moment , walked carelessly up to the looking-glass on the wall , with his right hand raised the red bandage on his forehead a little , and began examining his bruises and scars , which had not yet disappeared . 
`` He 's alone , '' thought Mitya , `` in all probability he 's alone . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking-glass , turned suddenly to the window and looked out . 
Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow . 
`` She may be there behind the screen . 
Perhaps she 's asleep by now , '' he thought , with a pang at his heart . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the window . 
`` He 's looking for her out of the window , so she 's not there . 
Why should he stare out into the dark ? 
He 's wild with impatience . '' 
... Mitya slipped back at once , and fell to gazing in at the window again . 
The old man was sitting down at the table , apparently disappointed . 
At last he put his elbow on the table , and laid his right cheek against his hand . 
Mitya watched him eagerly . 
`` He 's alone , he 's alone ! '' 
he repeated again . 
`` If she were here , his face would be different . '' 
Strange to say , a queer , irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she was not here . 
`` It 's not that she 's not here , '' he explained to himself , immediately , `` but that I ca n't tell for certain whether she is or not . '' 
Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionally clear , that he took in everything to the slightest detail , and missed no point . 
But a feeling of misery , the misery of uncertainty and indecision , was growing in his heart with every instant . 
`` Is she here or not ? '' 
The angry doubt filled his heart , and suddenly , making up his mind , he put out his hand and softly knocked on the window frame . 
He knocked the signal the old man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov , twice slowly and then three times more quickly , the signal that meant `` Grushenka is here ! '' 
The old man started , jerked up his head , and , jumping up quickly , ran to the window . 
Mitya slipped away into the shadow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch opened the window and thrust his whole head out . 
`` Grushenka , is it you ? 
Is it you ? '' 
he said , in a sort of trembling half-whisper . 
`` Where are you , my angel , where are you ? '' 
He was fearfully agitated and breathless . 
