To this I reply again , `` Yes ! 
my hero had faith , a faith holy and steadfast , but still I am not going to apologise for him . '' 
Though I declared above , and perhaps too hastily , that I should not explain or justify my hero , I see that some explanation is necessary for the understanding of the rest of my story . 
Let me say then , it was not a question of miracles . 
There was no frivolous and impatient expectation of miracles in his mind . 
And Alyosha needed no miracles at the time , for the triumph of some preconceived idea - oh no , not at all - what he saw before all was one figure - the figure of his beloved elder , the figure of that holy man whom he revered with such adoration . 
The fact is that all the love that lay concealed in his pure young heart for everyone and everything had , for the past year , been concentrated - and perhaps wrongly so - on one being , his beloved elder . 
It is true that being had for so long been accepted by him as his ideal , that all his young strength and energy could not but turn towards that ideal , even to the forgetting at the moment `` of everyone and everything . '' 
He remembered afterwards how , on that terrible day , he had entirely forgotten his brother Dmitri , about whom he had been so anxious and troubled the day before ; he had forgotten , too , to take the two hundred roubles to Ilusha 's father , though he had so warmly intended to do so the preceding evening . 
But again it was not miracles he needed but only `` the higher justice '' which had been in his belief outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded his heart . 
And what does it signify that this `` justice '' looked for by Alyosha inevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately by the ashes of his adored teacher ? 
Why , everyone in the monastery cherished the same thought and the same hope , even those whose intellects Alyosha revered , Father Paissy himself , for instance . 
And so Alyosha , untroubled by doubts , clothed his dreams too in the same form as all the rest . 
And a whole year of life in the monastery had formed the habit of this expectation in his heart . 
But it was justice , justice , he thirsted for , not simply miracles . 
And now the man who should , he believed , have been exalted above everyone in the whole world , that man , instead of receiving the glory that was his due , was suddenly degraded and dishonoured ! 
What for ? 
Who had judged him ? 
Who could have decreed this ? 
Those were the questions that wrung his inexperienced and virginal heart . 
He could not endure without mortification , without resentment even , that the holiest of holy men should have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of the frivolous crowd so inferior to him . 
Even had there been no miracles , had there been nothing marvellous to justify his hopes , why this indignity , why this humiliation , why this premature decay , `` in excess of nature , '' as the spiteful monks said ? 
Why this `` sign from heaven , '' which they so triumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont , and why did they believe they had gained the right to acclaim it ? 
Where is the finger of Providence ? 
Why did Providence hide its face `` at the most critical moment '' -LRB- so Alyosha thought it -RRB- , as though voluntarily submitting to the blind , dumb , pitiless laws of nature ? 
That was why Alyosha 's heart was bleeding , and , of course , as I have said already , the sting of it all was that the man he loved above everything on earth should be put to shame and humiliated ! 
This murmuring may have been shallow and unreasonable in my hero , but I repeat again for the third time - and am prepared to admit that it might be difficult to defend my feeling - I am glad that my hero showed himself not too reasonable at that moment , for any man of sense will always come back to reason in time , but , if love does not gain the upper hand in a boy 's heart at such an exceptional moment , when will it ? 
I will not , however , omit to mention something strange , which came for a time to the surface of Alyosha 's mind at this fatal and obscure moment . 
This new something was the harassing impression left by the conversation with Ivan , which now persistently haunted Alyosha 's mind . 
At this moment it haunted him . 
Oh , it was not that something of the fundamental , elemental , so to speak , faith of his soul had been shaken . 
He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly , though he was suddenly murmuring against Him . 
Yet a vague but tormenting and evil impression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before , suddenly revived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface of his consciousness . 
It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin , crossing the pine copse from the hermitage to the monastery , suddenly noticed Alyosha , lying face downwards on the ground under a tree , not moving and apparently asleep . 
He went up and called him by his name . 
`` You here , Alexey ? 
Can you have - '' he began wondering but broke off . 
He had meant to say , `` Can you have come to this ? '' 
Alyosha did not look at him , but from a slight movement Rakitin at once saw that he heard and understood him . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
he went on ; but the surprise in his face gradually passed into a smile that became more and more ironical . 
`` I say , I 've been looking for you for the last two hours . 
You suddenly disappeared . 
What are you about ? 
What foolery is this ? 
You might just look at me ... '' Alyosha raised his head , sat up and leaned his back against the tree . 
He was not crying , but there was a look of suffering and irritability in his face . 
He did not look at Rakitin , however , but looked away to one side of him . 
`` Do you know your face is quite changed ? 
There 's none of your famous mildness to be seen in it . 
Are you angry with someone ? 
Have they been ill-treating you ? '' 
`` Let me alone , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with a weary gesture of his hand , still looking away from him . 
`` Oho ! 
So that 's how we are feeling ! 
So you can shout at people like other mortals . 
That is a come-down from the angels . 
I say , Alyosha , you have surprised me , do you hear ? 
I mean it . 
It 's long since I 've been surprised at anything here . 
I always took you for an educated man . 
Alyosha at last looked at him , but vaguely , as though scarcely understanding what he said . 
`` Can you really be so upset simply because your old man has begun to stink ? 
You do n't mean to say you seriously believed that he was going to work miracles ? '' 
exclaimed Rakitin , genuinely surprised again . 
`` I believed , I believe , I want to believe , and I will believe , what more do you want ? '' 
cried Alyosha irritably . 
`` Nothing at all , my boy . 
Damn it all ! 
why , no schoolboy of thirteen believes in that now . 
But there ... So now you are in a temper with your God , you are rebelling against Him ; He has n't given promotion , He has n't bestowed the order of merit ! 
Eh , you are a set ! '' 
Alyosha gazed a long while with his eyes half closed at Rakitin , and there was a sudden gleam in his eyes ... but not of anger with Rakitin . 
`` I am not rebelling against my God ; I simply ` do n't accept His world . ' '' 
Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile . 
`` How do you mean , you do n't accept the world ? '' 
Rakitin thought a moment over his answer . 
`` What idiocy is this ? '' 
Alyosha did not answer . 
`` Come , enough nonsense , now to business . 
Have you had anything to eat to-day ? '' 
`` I do n't remember ... . 
I think I have . '' 
`` You need keeping up , to judge by your face . 
It makes one sorry to look at you . 
You did n't sleep all night either , I hear ; you had a meeting in there . 
And then all this bobbery afterwards . 
Most likely you 've had nothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread . 
I 've got some sausage in my pocket ; I 've brought it from the town in case of need , only you wo n't eat sausage ... '' `` Give me some . '' 
`` I say ! 
You are going it ! 
Why , it 's a regular mutiny , with barricades ! 
Well , my boy , we must make the most of it . 
Come to my place ... should n't mind a drop of vodka myself , I am tired to death . 
Vodka is going too far for you , I suppose ... or would you like some ? '' 
`` Give me some vodka too . '' 
`` Hullo ! 
You surprise me , brother ! '' 
Rakitin looked at him in amazement . 
`` Well , one way or another , vodka or sausage , this is a jolly fine chance and must n't be missed . 
