She rushed impulsively at Ivan , and seizing both his hands , pressed them warmly . 
`` But what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie and Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position . 
You can speak with complete openness to Agafya , but spare dear auntie . 
You will know how to do that . 
You ca n't think how wretched I was yesterday and this morning , wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter - for one can never tell such things in a letter ... Now it will be easy for me to write , for you will see them and explain everything . 
Oh , how glad I am ! 
But I am only glad of that , believe me . 
Of course , no one can take your place ... . 
I will run at once to write the letter , '' she finished suddenly , and took a step as though to go out of the room . 
`` And what about Alyosha and his opinion , which you were so desperately anxious to hear ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
There was a sarcastic , angry note in her voice . 
`` I had not forgotten that , '' cried Katerina Ivanovna , coming to a sudden standstill , `` and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment ? '' 
she added , with warm and bitter reproachfulness . 
`` What I said , I repeat . 
I must have his opinion . 
More than that , I must have his decision ! 
As he says , so it shall be . 
You see how anxious I am for your words , Alexey Fyodorovitch ... But what 's the matter ? '' 
`` I could n't have believed it . 
I ca n't understand it ! '' 
Alyosha cried suddenly in distress . 
`` He is going to Moscow , and you cry out that you are glad . 
You said that on purpose ! 
And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that but sorry to be - losing a friend . 
But that was acting , too - you were playing a part as in a theatre ! '' 
`` In a theatre ? 
What ? 
What do you mean ? '' 
exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna , profoundly astonished , flushing crimson , and frowning . 
`` Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him , you persist in telling him to his face that it 's fortunate he is going , '' said Alyosha breathlessly . 
He was standing at the table and did not sit down . 
`` What are you talking about ? 
I do n't understand . '' 
`` I do n't understand myself ... . 
I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I am not saying it properly , but I 'll say it all the same , '' Alyosha went on in the same shaking and broken voice . 
`` What I see is that perhaps you do n't love Dmitri at all ... and never have , from the beginning ... . 
And Dmitri , too , has never loved you ... and only esteems you ... . 
I really do n't know how I dare to say all this , but somebody must tell the truth ... for nobody here will tell the truth . '' 
`` What truth ? '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and there was an hysterical ring in her voice . 
`` I 'll tell you , '' Alyosha went on with desperate haste , as though he were jumping from the top of a house . 
`` Call Dmitri ; I will fetch him and let him come here and take your hand and take Ivan 's and join your hands . 
For you 're torturing Ivan , simply because you love him - and torturing him , because you love Dmitri through ` self-laceration ' - with an unreal love - because you 've persuaded yourself . '' 
Alyosha broke off and was silent . 
`` You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot - that 's what you are ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna snapped . 
Her face was white and her lips were moving with anger . 
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up . 
His hat was in his hand . 
`` You are mistaken , my good Alyosha , '' he said , with an expression Alyosha had never seen in his face before - an expression of youthful sincerity and strong , irresistibly frank feeling . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for me ! 
She has known all the time that I cared for her - though I never said a word of my love to her - she knew , but she did n't care for me . 
I have never been her friend either , not for one moment ; she is too proud to need my friendship . 
She kept me at her side as a means of revenge . 
She revenged with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their first meeting . 
For even that first meeting has rankled in her heart as an insult - that 's what her heart is like ! 
She has talked to me of nothing but her love for him . 
I am going now ; but , believe me , Katerina Ivanovna , you really love him . 
And the more he insults you , the more you love him - that 's your ` laceration . ' 
You love him just as he is ; you love him for insulting you . 
If he reformed , you 'd give him up at once and cease to love him . 
But you need him so as to contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity . 
And it all comes from your pride . 
Oh , there 's a great deal of humiliation and self-abasement about it , but it all comes from pride ... . 
I am too young and I 've loved you too much . 
I know that I ought not to say this , that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you , and it would be less offensive for you . 
But I am going far away , and shall never come back ... . 
It is for ever . 
I do n't want to sit beside a ` laceration . ' 
... But I do n't know how to speak now . 
I 've said everything ... . 
Good-bye , Katerina Ivanovna ; you ca n't be angry with me , for I am a hundred times more severely punished than you , if only by the fact that I shall never see you again . 
Good-bye ! 
I do n't want your hand . 
You have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this moment . 
I shall forgive you later , but now I do n't want your hand . 
Den Dank , Dame , begehr ich nicht , '' * he added , with a forced smile , showing , however , that he could read Schiller , and read him till he knew him by heart - which Alyosha would never have believed . 
He went out of the room without saying good-bye even to his hostess , Madame Hohlakov . 
Alyosha clasped his hands . 
* Thank you , madam , I want nothing . 
`` Ivan ! '' 
he cried desperately after him . 
`` Come back , Ivan ! 
No , nothing will induce him to come back now ! '' 
he cried again , regretfully realising it ; `` but it 's my fault , my fault . 
I began it ! 
Ivan spoke angrily , wrongly . 
Unjustly and angrily . 
He must come back here , come back , '' Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically . 
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room . 
`` You have done no harm . 
You behaved beautifully , like an angel , '' Madame Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha . 
`` I will do my utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going . '' 
Her face beamed with delight , to the great distress of Alyosha , but Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned . 
She had two hundred-rouble notes in her hand . 
`` I have a great favour to ask of you , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she began , addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice , as though nothing had happened . 
`` A week - yes , I think it was a week ago - Dmitri Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action - a very ugly action . 
There is a low tavern here , and in it he met that discharged officer , that captain , whom your father used to employ in some business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain , seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it , in that insulting fashion . 
