of the fatal position of Russia ? 
of the Emperor Napoleon ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Then you know what for . 
It 's different for other people ; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all . 
That 's what we care about . 
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now . 
just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions . 
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months ? 
To ask me , ` What do you believe , or do n't you believe at all ? ' 
That 's what your eyes have been meaning for these three months , have n't they ? '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` You are not laughing at me , now , Ivan ? 
`` Me laughing ! 
I do n't want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months . 
Alyosha , look straight at me ! 
Of course , I am just such a little boy as you are , only not a novice . 
And what have Russian boys been doing up till now , some of them , I mean ? 
In this stinking tavern , for instance , here , they meet and sit down in a corner . 
They 've never met in their lives before and , when they go out of the tavern , they wo n't meet again for forty years . 
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern ? 
Of the eternal questions , of the existence of God and immortality . 
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism , of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern , so that it all comes to the same , they 're the same questions turned inside out . 
And masses , masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions ! 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , for real Russians the questions of God 's existence and of immortality , or , as you say , the same questions turned inside out , come first and foremost , of course , and so they should , '' said Alyosha , still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile . 
`` Well , Alyosha , it 's sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all , but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine . 
But there 's one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of . '' 
`` How nicely you put that in ! '' 
Alyosha laughed suddenly . 
`` Well , tell me where to begin , give your orders . 
The existence of God , eh ? '' 
`` Begin where you like . 
You declared yesterday at father 's that there was no God . '' 
Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother . 
`` I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow . 
But now I 've no objection to discussing with you , and I say so very seriously . 
I want to be friends with you , Alyosha , for I have no friends and want to try it . 
Well , only fancy , perhaps I too accept God , '' laughed Ivan ; `` that 's a surprise for you , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes of course , if you are not joking now . '' 
`` Joking ? 
I was told at the elder 's yesterday that I was joking . 
You know , dear boy , there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that , if there were no God , he would have to be invented . 
S'il n'existait pas Dieu , il faudrait l'inventer . 
And man has actually invented God . 
And what 's strange , what would be marvellous , is not that God should really exist ; the marvel is that such an idea , the idea of the necessity of God , could enter the head of such a savage , vicious beast as man . 
So holy it is , so touching , so wise and so great a credit it does to man . 
As for me , I 've long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man . 
And I wo n't go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject , all derived from European hypotheses ; for what 's a hypothesis there is an axiom with the Russian boy , and not only with the boys but with their teachers too , for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves . 
And so I omit all the hypotheses . 
For what are we aiming at now ? 
I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature , that is what manner of man I am , what I believe in , and for what I hope , that 's it , is n't it ? 
And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply . 
But you must note this : if God exists and if He really did create the world , then , as we all know , He created it according to the geometry of Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in space . 
Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers , and even some of the most distinguished , who doubt whether the whole universe , or to speak more widely , the whole of being , was only created in Euclid 's geometry ; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines , which according to Euclid can never meet on earth , may meet somewhere in infinity . 
I have come to the conclusion that , since I ca n't understand even that , I ca n't expect to understand about God . 
I acknowledge humbly that I have no faculty for settling such questions , I have a Euclidian earthly mind , and how could I solve problems that are not of this world ? 
And I advise you never to think about it either , my dear Alyosha , especially about God , whether He exists or not . 
All such questions are utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three dimensions . 
And so I accept God and am glad to , and what 's more , I accept His wisdom , His purpose which are utterly beyond our ken ; I believe in the underlying order and the meaning of life ; I believe in the eternal harmony in which they say we shall one day be blended . 
I believe in the Word to Which the universe is striving , and Which Itself was ` with God , ' and Which Itself is God and so on , and so on , to infinity . 
There are all sorts of phrases for it . 
I seem to be on the right path , do n't I ' ? 
Yet would you believe it , in the final result I do n't accept this world of God 's , and , although I know it exists , I do n't accept it at all . 
It 's not that I do n't accept God , you must understand , it 's the world created by Him I do n't and can not accept . 
Let me make it plain . 
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for , that all the humiliating absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage , like the despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mind of man , that in the world 's finale , at the moment of eternal harmony , something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts , for the comforting of all resentments , for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity , of all the blood they 've shed ; that it will make it not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened with men - but thought all that may come to pass , I do n't accept it . 
I wo n't accept it . 
Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself , I shall see it and say that they 've met , but still I wo n't accept it . 
That 's what 's at the root of me , Alyosha ; that 's my creed . 
I am in earnest in what I say . 
I began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose , but I 've led up to my confession , for that 's all you want . 
You did n't want to hear about God , but only to know what the brother you love lives by . 
And so I 've told you . '' 
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling . 
`` And why did you begin ` as stupidly as you could ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha , looking dreamily at him . 
`` To begin with , for the sake of being Russian . 
Russian conversations on such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly . 
And secondly , the stupider one is , the closer one is to reality . 
The stupider one is , the clearer one is . 
Stupidity is brief and artless , while intelligence wriggles and hides itself . 
Intelligence is a knave , but stupidity is honest and straight forward . 
I 've led the conversation to my despair , and the more stupidly I have presented it , the better for me . '' 
`` You will explain why you do n't accept the world ? '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` To be sure I will , it 's not a secret , that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
Dear little brother , I do n't want to corrupt you or to turn you from your stronghold , perhaps I want to be healed by you . '' 
Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child . 
Alyosha had never seen such a smile on his face before . 
Rebellion `` I MUST make one confession '' Ivan began . 
`` I could never understand how one can love one 's neighbours . 
It 's just one 's neighbours , to my mind , that one ca n't love , though one might love those at a distance . 
I once read somewhere of John the Merciful , a saint , that when a hungry , frozen beggar came to him , he took him into his bed , held him in his arms , and began breathing into his mouth , which was putrid and loathsome from some awful disease . 
I am convinced that he did that from ` self-laceration , ' from the self-laceration of falsity , for the sake of the charity imposed by duty , as a penance laid on him . 
For anyone to love a man , he must be hidden , for as soon as he shows his face , love is gone . '' 
`` Father Zossima has talked of that more than once , '' observed Alyosha ; `` he , too , said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practised in love , from loving him . 
But yet there 's a great deal of love in mankind , and almost Christ-like love . 
I know that myself , Ivan . '' 
