Ivan snapped out . 
`` But you are clever , anyway . 
You are scolding again ? 
I did n't ask out of sympathy . 
You need n't answer . 
Now rheumatism has come in again - '' `` Fool ! '' 
repeated Ivan . 
`` You keep saying the same thing ; but I had such an attack of rheumatism last year that I remember it to this day . '' 
`` The devil have rheumatism ! '' 
`` Why not , if I sometimes put on fleshly form ? 
I put on fleshly form and I take the consequences . 
Satan sum et nihil humanum a me alienum puto . '' 
* * I am Satan , and deem nothing human alien to me . 
`` What , what , Satan sum et nihil humanum ... that 's not bad for the devil ! '' 
`` I am glad I 've pleased you at last . '' 
`` But you did n't get that from me . '' 
Ivan stopped suddenly , seeming struck . 
`` That never entered my head , that 's strange . '' 
`` C'est du nouveau , n'est - ce pas ? '' 
* This time I 'll act honestly and explain to you . 
Listen , in dreams and especially in nightmares , from indigestion or anything , a man sees sometimes such artistic visions , such complex and real actuality , such events , even a whole world of events , woven into such a plot , with such unexpected details from the most exalted matters to the last button on a cuff , as I swear Leo Tolstoy has never invented . 
Yet such dreams are sometimes seen not by writers , but by the most ordinary people , officials , journalists , priests ... . 
The subject is a complete enigma . 
A statesman confessed to me , indeed , that all his best ideas came to him when he was asleep . 
Well , that 's how it is now , though I am your hallucination , yet just as in a nightmare , I say original things which had not entered your head before . 
So I do n't repeat your ideas , yet I am only your nightmare , nothing more . '' 
* It 's new , is n't it ? 
`` You are lying , your aim is to convince me you exist apart and are not my nightmare , and now you are asserting you are a dream . '' 
`` My dear fellow , I 've adopted a special method to-day , I 'll explain it to you afterwards . 
Stay , where did I break off ? 
Oh , yes ! 
I caught cold then , only not here but yonder . '' 
`` Where is yonder ? 
Tell me , will you be here long . 
Ca n't you go away ? '' 
Ivan exclaimed almost in despair . 
He ceased walking to and fro , sat down on the sofa , leaned his elbows on the table again and held his head tight in both hands . 
He pulled the wet towel off and flung it away in vexation . 
It was evidently of no use . 
`` Your nerves are out of order , '' observed the gentleman , with a carelessly easy , though perfectly polite , air . 
`` You are angry with me even for being able to catch cold , though it happened in a most natural way . 
I was hurrying then to a diplomatic soiree at the house of a lady of high rank in Petersburg , who was aiming at influence in the Ministry . 
Well , an evening suit , white tie , gloves , though I was God knows where and had to fly through space to reach your earth ... . 
Of course , it took only an instant , but you know a ray of light from the sun takes full eight minutes , and fancy in an evening suit and open waistcoat . 
Spirits do n't freeze , but when one 's in fleshly form , well ... in brief , I did n't think , and set off , and you know in those ethereal spaces , in the water that is above the firmament , there 's such a frost ... at least one ca n't call it frost , you fancy , 150 degrees below zero ! 
You know the game the village girls play - they invite the unwary to lick an axe in thirty degrees of frost , the tongue instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skin off , so it bleeds . 
But that 's only in 30 degrees , in 150 degrees I imagine it would be enough to put your finger on the axe and it would be the end of it ... if only there could be an axe there . '' 
`` And can there be an axe there ? '' 
Ivan interrupted , carelessly and disdainfully . 
He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in the delusion and not to sink into complete insanity `` An axe ? '' 
the guest interrupted in surprise . 
`` Yes , what would become of an axe there ? '' 
Ivan cried suddenly , with a sort of savage and insistent obstinacy . 
`` What would become of an axe in space ? 
Quelle idee ! 
If it were to fall to any distance , it would begin , I think , flying round the earth without knowing why , like a satellite . 
The astronomers would calculate the rising and the setting of the axe ; Gatzuk would put it in his calendar , that 's all . '' 
`` You are stupid , awfully stupid , '' said Ivan peevishly . 
`` Fib more cleverly or I wo n't listen . 
You want to get the better of me by realism , to convince me that you exist , but I do n't want to believe you exist ! 
I wo n't believe it ! '' 
`` But I am not fibbing , it 's all the truth ; the truth is unhappily hardly ever amusing . 
I see you persist in expecting something big of me , and perhaps something fine . 
That 's a great pity , for I only give what I can - '' `` Do n't talk philosophy , you ass ! '' 
`` Philosophy , indeed , when all my right side is numb and I am moaning and groaning . 
I 've tried all the medical faculty : they can diagnose beautifully , they have the whole of your disease at their finger-tips , but they 've no idea how to cure you . 
There was an enthusiastic little student here , ` You may die , ' said he , ` but you 'll know perfectly what disease you are dying of ! ' 
And then what a way they have of sending people to specialists ! 
` We only diagnose , ' they say , ` but go to such-and-such a specialist , he 'll cure you . ' 
The old doctor who used to cure all sorts of disease has completely disappeared , I assure you , now there are only specialists and they all advertise in the newspapers . 
If anything is wrong with your nose , they send you to Paris : there , they say , is a European specialist who cures noses . 
If you go to Paris , he 'll look at your nose ; I can only cure your right nostril , he 'll tell you , for I do n't cure the left nostril , that 's not my speciality , but go to Vienna , there there 's a specialist who will cure your left nostril . 
What are you to do ? 
I fell back on popular remedies , a German doctor advised me to rub myself with honey and salt in the bath-house . 
Solely to get an extra bath I went , smeared myself all over and it did me no good at all . 
In despair I wrote to Count Mattei in Milan . 
He sent me a book and some drops , bless him , and , only fancy , Hoff 's malt extract cured me ! 
I bought it by accident , drank a bottle and a half of it , and I was ready to dance , it took it away completely . 
I made up my mind to write to the papers to thank him , I was prompted by a feeling of gratitude , and only fancy , it led to no end of a bother : not a single paper would take my letter . 
` It would be very reactionary , ' they said , ` none will believe it . 
Le diable n'existe point . 
* You 'd better remain anonymous , ' they advised me . 
What use is a letter of thanks if it 's anonymous ? 
I laughed with the men at the newspaper office ; ` It 's reactionary to believe in God in our days , ' I said , ` but I am the devil , so I may be believed in . ' 
` We quite understand that , ' they said . 
` Who does n't believe in the devil ? 
Yet it wo n't do , it might injure our reputation . 
As a joke , if you like . ' 
But I thought as a joke it would n't be very witty . 
So it was n't printed . 
And do you know , I have felt sore about it to this day . 
My best feelings , gratitude , for instance , are literally denied me simply from my social position . '' 
* The devil does not exist . 
`` Philosophical reflections again ? '' 
Ivan snarled malignantly . 
`` God preserve me from it , but one ca n't help complaining sometimes . 
I am a slandered man . 
You upbraid me every moment with being stupid . 
One can see you are young . 
My dear fellow , intelligence is n't the only thing ! 
