I paid no attention to her at all , but all at once , when the minute came , I 'd be all devotion to her , crawl on my knees , kiss her feet , and I always , always - I remember it as though it were to-day - reduced her to that tinkling , quiet , nervous , queer little laugh . 
It was peculiar to her . 
I knew her attacks always used to begin like that . 
The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically , and this little laugh was not a sign of delight , though it made a very good counterfeit . 
That 's the great thing , to know how to take everyone . 
Once Belyavsky - he was a handsome fellow , and rich - used to like to come here and hang about her - suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence . 
And she - such a mild sheep - why , I thought she would have knocked me down for that blow . 
How she set on me ! 
` You 're beaten , beaten now , ' she said , ` You 've taken a blow from him . 
You have been trying to sell me to him , ' she said ... ` And how dared he strike you in my presence ! 
Do n't dare come near me again , never , never ! 
Run at once , challenge him to a duel ! ' 
... I took her to the monastery then to bring her to her senses . 
The holy Fathers prayed her back to reason . 
But I swear , by God , Alyosha , I never insulted the poor crazy girl ! 
Only once , perhaps , in the first year ; then she was very fond of praying . 
She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and used to turn me out of her room then . 
I 'll knock that mysticism out of her , thought I ! 
` Here , ' said I , ` you see your holy image . 
Here it is . 
Here I take it down . 
You believe it 's miraculous , but here , I 'll spit on it directly and nothing will happen to me for it ! ' 
... When she saw it , good Lord ! 
I thought she would kill me . 
But she only jumped up , wrung her hands , then suddenly hid her face in them , began trembling all over and fell on the floor ... fell all of a heap . 
Alyosha , Alyosha , what 's the matter ? '' 
The old man jumped up in alarm . 
From the time he had begun speaking about his mother , a change had gradually come over Alyosha 's face . 
He flushed crimson , his eyes glowed , his lips quivered . 
The old sot had gone spluttering on , noticing nothing , till the moment when something very strange happened to Alyosha . 
Precisely what he was describing in the crazy woman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha . 
He jumped up from his seat exactly as his mother was said to have done , wrung his hands , hid his face in them , and fell back in his chair , shaking all over in an hysterical paroxysm of sudden violent , silent weeping . 
His extraordinary resemblance to his mother particularly impressed the old man . 
`` Ivan , Ivan ! 
Water , quickly ! 
It 's like her , exactly as she used to be then , his mother . 
Spurt some water on him from your mouth , that 's what I used to do to her . 
He 's upset about his mother , his mother , '' he muttered to Ivan . 
`` But she was my mother , too , I believe , his mother . 
Was she not ? '' 
said Ivan , with uncontrolled anger and contempt . 
The old man shrank before his flashing eyes . 
But something very strange had happened , though only for a second ; it seemed really to have escaped the old man 's mind that Alyosha 's mother actually was the mother of Ivan too . 
`` Your mother ? '' 
he muttered , not understanding . 
`` What do you mean ? 
What mother are you talking about ? 
Was she ? 
... Why , damn it ! 
of course she was yours too ! 
Damn it ! 
My mind has never been so darkened before . 
Excuse me , why , I was thinking Ivan ... He he he ! '' 
He stopped . 
A broad , drunken , half senseless grin overspread his face . 
At that moment a fearful noise , and clamour was heard in the hall , there were violent shouts , the door was flung open , and Dmitri burst into the room . 
The old man rushed to Ivan in terror . 
`` He 'll kill me ! 
He 'll kill me ! 
Do n't let him get at me ! '' 
he screamed , clinging to the skirt of Ivan 's coat . 
The Sensualists GRIGORY and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri . 
They had been struggling with him in the passage , refusing to admit him , acting on instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before . 
Taking advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room to look about him , Grigory ran round the table , closed the double doors on the opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments , and stood before the closed doors , stretching wide his arms , prepared to defend the entrance , so to speak , with the last drop of his blood . 
Seeing this , Dmitri uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory . 
`` Then she 's there ! 
She 's hidden there ! 
Out of the way , scoundrel ! '' 
He tried to pull Grigory away , but the old servant pushed him back . 
Beside himself with fury , Dmitri struck out , and hit Grigory with all his might . 
The old man fell like a log , and Dmitri , leaping over him , broke in the door . 
Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room , huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` She 's here ! '' 
shouted Dmitri . 
`` I saw her turn towards the house just now , but I could n't catch her . 
Where is she ? 
Where is she ? '' 
That shout , `` She 's here ! '' 
produced an indescribable effect on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
All his terror left him . 
`` Hold him ! 
Hold him ! '' 
he cried , and dashed after Dmitri . 
Meanwhile Grigory had got up from the floor , but still seemed stunned . 
Ivan and Alyosha ran after their father . 
In the third room something was heard to fall on the floor with a ringing crash : it was a large glass vase - not an expensive one - on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it . 
`` At him ! '' 
shouted the old man . 
`` Help ! '' 
Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back . 
`` Why do you run after him ? 
He 'll murder you outright , '' Ivan cried wrathfully at his father . 
`` Ivan ! 
Alyosha ! 
She must be here . 
Grushenka 's here . 
He said he saw her himself , running . '' 
He was choking . 
He was not expecting Grushenka at the time , and the sudden news that she was here made him beside himself . 
He was trembling all over . 
