The others repelled the idea even more emphatically , although still with the utmost hilarity , and at last they went on their way . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them , and perhaps it was so , no one knows for certain , and no one ever knew . 
But five or six months later , all the town was talking , with intense and sincere indignation , of Lizaveta 's condition , and trying to find out who was the miscreant who had wronged her . 
Then suddenly a terrible rumour was all over the town that this miscreant was no other than Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Who set the rumour going ? 
Of that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still among us was an elderly and much respected civil councillor , the father of grown-up daughters , who could hardly have spread the tale , even if there had been any foundation for it . 
But rumour pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch , and persisted in pointing at him . 
Of course this was no great grievance to him : he would not have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople . 
In those days he was proud , and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle of the officials and nobles , whom he entertained so well . 
At the time , Grigory stood up for his master vigorously . 
He provoked quarrels and altercations in defence of him and succeeded in bringing some people round to his side . 
`` It 's the wench 's own fault , '' he asserted , and the culprit was Karp , a dangerous convict , who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us , as he had hidden in our town . 
This conjecture sounded plausible , for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighbourhood just at that time in the autumn , and had robbed three people . 
But this affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy from the poor idiot . 
She was better looked after than ever . 
A well-to-do merchants 's widow named Kondratyev arranged to take her into her house at the end of April , meaning not to let her go out until after the confinement . 
They kept a constant watch over her , but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day , and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
How , in her condition , she managed to climb over the high , strong fence remained a mystery . 
Some maintained that she must have been lifted over by somebody ; others hinted at something more uncanny . 
The most likely explanation is that it happened naturally - that Lizaveta , accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens , had somehow managed to climb this fence , in spite of her condition , and had leapt down , injuring herself . 
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta , while he ran to fetch an old midwife who lived close by . 
They saved the baby , but Lizaveta died at dawn . 
Grigory took the baby , brought it home , and making his wife sit down , put it on her lap . 
`` A child of God - an orphan is akin to all , '' he said , `` and to us above others . 
Our little lost one has sent us this , who has come from the devil 's son and a holy innocent . 
Nurse him and weep no more . '' 
So Marfa brought up the child . 
He was christened Pavel , to which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch -LRB- son of Fyodor -RRB- . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this , and thought it amusing , though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility . 
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling . 
Later on , Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child , calling him Smerdyakov , after his mother 's nickname . 
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch 's second servant , and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our story begins . 
He was employed as cook . 
I ought to say something of this Smerdyakov , but I am ashamed of keeping my readers ' attention so long occupied with these common menials , and I will go back to my story , hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - in Verse ALYOSHA remained for some time irresolute after hearing the command his father shouted to him from the carriage . 
But in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still . 
That was not his way . 
He went at once to the kitchen to find out what his father had been doing above . 
Then he set off , trusting that on the way he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him . 
I hasten to add that his father 's shouts , commanding him to return home `` with his mattress and pillow '' did not frighten him in the least . 
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely `` a flourish '' to produce an effect . 
In the same way a tradesman in our town who was celebrating his name-day with a party of friends , getting angry at being refused more vodka , smashed up his own crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife 's clothes , and finally broke his windows , all for the sake of effect . 
Next day , of course , when he was sober , he regretted the broken cups and saucers . 
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery next day , possibly even that evening . 
Moreover , he was fully persuaded that his father might hurt anyone else , but would not hurt him . 
Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would want to hurt him , and , what is more , he knew that no one could hurt him . 
This was for him an axiom , assumed once for all without question , and he went his way without hesitation , relying on it . 
But at that moment an anxiety of sort disturbed him , and worried him the more because he could not formulate it . 
It was the fear of a woman , of Katerina Ivanovna , who had so urgently entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to come and see her about something . 
This request and the necessity of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart , and this feeling had grown more and more painful all the morning in spite of the scenes at the hermitage and at the Father Superior 's . 
He was not uneasy because he did not know what she would speak of and what he must answer . 
And he was not afraid of her simply as a woman . 
Though he knew little of women , he spent his life , from early childhood till he entered the monastery , entirely with women . 
He was afraid of that woman , Katerina Ivanovna . 
He had been afraid of her from the first time he saw her . 
He had only seen her two or three times , and had only chanced to say a few words to her . 
He thought of her as a beautiful , proud , imperious girl . 
It was not her beauty which troubled him , but something else . 
And the vagueness of his apprehension increased the apprehension itself . 
The girl 's aims were of the noblest , he knew that . 
She was trying to save his brother Dmitri simply through generosity , though he had already behaved badly to her . 
Yet , although Alyosha recognised and did justice to all these fine and generous sentiments , a shiver began to run down his back as soon as he drew near her house . 
He reflected that he would not find Ivan , who was so intimate a friend , with her , for Ivan was certainly now with his father . 
Dmitri he was even more certain not to find there , and he had a foreboding of the reason . 
And so his conversation would be with her alone . 
He had a great longing to run and see his brother Dmitri before that fateful interview . 
Without showing him the letter , he could talk to him about it . 
But Dmitri lived a long way off , and he was sure to be away from home too . 
Standing still for a minute , he reached a final decision . 
Crossing himself with a rapid and accustomed gesture , and at once smiling , he turned resolutely in the direction of his terrible lady . 
He knew her house . 
If he went by the High Street and then across the market-place , it was a long way round . 
Though our town is small , it is scattered , and the houses are far apart . 
And meanwhile his father was expecting him , and perhaps had not yet forgotten his command . 
He might be unreasonable , and so he had to make haste to get there and back . 
So he decided to take a short cut by the backway , for he knew every inch of the ground . 
This meant skirting fences , climbing over hurdles , and crossing other people 's back-yards , where everyone he met knew him and greeted him . 
In this way he could reach the High Street in half the time . 
He had to pass the garden adjoining his father 's , and belonging to a little tumbledown house with four windows . 
The owner of this house , as Alyosha knew , was a bedridden old woman , living with her daughter , who had been a genteel maid-servant in generals ' families in Petersburg . 
Now she had been at home a year , looking after her sick mother . 
She always dressed up in fine clothes , though her old mother and she had sunk into such poverty that they went every day to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and bread , which Marfa gave readily . 
Yet , though the young woman came up for soup , she had never sold any of her dresses , and one of these even had a long train - a fact which Alyosha had learned from Rakitin , who always knew everything that was going on in the town . 
He had forgotten it as soon as he heard it , but now , on reaching the garden , he remembered the dress with the train , raised his head , which had been bowed in thought , and came upon something quite unexpected . 
Over the hurdle in the garden , Dmitri , mounted on something , was leaning forward , gesticulating violently , beckoning to him , obviously afraid to utter a word for fear of being overheard . 
Alyosha ran up to the hurdle . 
`` It 's a good thing you looked up . 
I was nearly shouting to you , '' Mitya said in a joyful , hurried whisper . 
`` Climb in here quickly ! 
How splendid that you 've come ! 
I was just thinking of you '' Alyosha was delighted too , but he did not know how to get over the hurdle . 
Mitya put his powerful hand under his elbow to help him jump . 
Tucking up his cassock , Alyosha leapt over the hurdle with the agility of a bare-legged street urchin . 
`` Well done ! 
Now come along , '' said Mitya in an enthusiastic whisper . 
`` Where ? '' 
whispered Alyosha , looking about him and finding himself in a deserted garden with no one near but themselves . 
The garden was small , but the house was at least fifty paces away . 
`` There 's no one here . 
Why do you whisper ? '' 
