People described with relish , afterwards , how cleverly he had `` taken down '' all the witnesses for the prosecution , and as far as possible perplexed them and , what 's more , had aspersed their reputation and so depreciated the value of their evidence . 
But it was supposed that he did this rather by way of sport , so to speak , for professional glory , to show nothing had been omitted of the accepted methods , for all were convinced that he could do no real good by such disparagement of the witnesses , and probably was more aware of this than anyone , having some idea of his own in the background , some concealed weapon of defence , which he would suddenly reveal when the time came . 
But meanwhile , conscious of his strength , he seemed to be diverting himself . 
So , for instance , when Grigory , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's old servant , who had given the most damning piece of evidence about the open door , was examined , the counsel for the defence positively fastened upon him when his turn came to question him . 
It must be noted that Grigory entered the trial with a composed and almost stately air , not the least disconcerted by the majesty of the court or the vast audience listening to him . 
He gave evidence with as much confidence as though he had been talking with his Marfa , only perhaps more respectfully . 
It was impossible to make him contradict himself . 
The prosecutor questioned him first in detail about the family life of the Karamazovs . 
The family picture stood out in lurid colours . 
It was plain to ear and eye that the witness was guileless and impartial . 
In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his deceased master , he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and `` had n't brought up his children as he should . 
He 'd have been devoured by lice when he was little , if it had n't been for me , '' he added , describing Mitya 's early childhood . 
`` It was n't fair either of the father to wrong his son over his mother 's property , which was by right his . '' 
In reply to the prosecutor 's question what grounds he had for asserting that Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations , Grigory , to the surprise of everyone , had no proof at all to bring forward , but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was `` unfair , '' and that he ought `` to have paid him several thousand roubles more . '' 
I must note , by the way , that the prosecutor asked this question -LRB- whether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya 's inheritance -RRB- with marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it , not excepting Alyosha and Ivan , but he obtained no exact information from anyone ; all alleged that it was so , but were unable to bring forward any distinct proof . 
Grigory 's description of the scene at the dinner-table , when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father , threatening to come back to kill him , made a sinister impression on the court , especially as the old servant 's composure in telling it , his parsimony of words , and peculiar phraseology were as effective as eloquence . 
He observed that he was not angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face ; he had forgiven him long ago , he said . 
Of the deceased Smerdyakov he observed , crossing himself , that he was a lad of ability , but stupid and afflicted , and , worse still , an infidel , and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch and his elder son who had taught him to be so . 
But he defended Smerdyakov 's honesty almost with warmth , and related how Smerdyakov had once found the master 's money in the yard , and , instead of concealing it , had taken it to his master , who had rewarded him with a `` gold piece '' for it , and trusted him implicitly from that time forward . 
He maintained obstinately that the door into the garden had been open . 
But he was asked so many questions that I ca n't recall them all . 
At last the counsel for the defence began to cross-examine him , and the first question he asked was about the envelope in which Fyodor Pavlovitch was supposed to have put three thousand roubles for `` a certain person . '' 
`` Have you ever seen it , you , who were for so many years in close attendance on your master ? '' 
Grigory answered that he had not seen it and had never heard of the money from anyone `` till everybody was talking about it . '' 
This question about the envelope Fetyukovitch put to everyone who could conceivably have known of it , as persistently as the prosecutor asked his question about Dmitri 's inheritance , and got the same answer from all , that no one had seen the envelope , though many had heard of it . 
From the beginning everyone noticed Fetyukovitch 's persistence on this subject . 
`` Now , with your permission I 'll ask you a question , '' Fetyukovitch said , suddenly and unexpectedly . 
`` Of what was that balsam , or , rather , decoction , made , which , as we learn from the preliminary inquiry , you used on that evening to rub your lumbago , in the hope of curing it ? '' 
Grigory looked blankly at the questioner , and after a brief silence muttered , `` There was saffron in it . '' 
`` Nothing but saffron ? 
Do n't you remember any other ingredient ? '' 
`` There was milfoil in it , too . '' 
`` And pepper perhaps ? '' 
Fetyukovitch queried . 
`` Yes , there was pepper , too . '' 
`` Etcetera . 
And all dissolved in vodka ? '' 
`` In spirit . '' 
There was a faint sound of laughter in the court . 
`` You see , in spirit . 
After rubbing your back , I believe , you drank what was left in the bottle with a certain pious prayer , only known to your wife ? '' 
`` I did . '' 
`` Did you drink much ? 
Roughly speaking , a wine-glass or two ? '' 
`` It might have been a tumbler-full . '' 
`` A tumbler-full , even . 
Perhaps a tumbler and a half ? '' 
Grigory did not answer . 
He seemed to see what was meant . 
`` A glass and a half of neat spirit - is not at all bad , do n't you think ? 
You might see the gates of heaven open , not only the door into the garden ? '' 
Grigory remained silent . 
There was another laugh in the court . 
The President made a movement . 
`` Do you know for a fact , '' Fetyukovitch persisted , `` whether you were awake or not when you saw the open door ? '' 
`` I was on my legs . '' 
`` That 's not a proof that you were awake . '' 
-LRB- There was again laughter in the court . -RRB- 
`` Could you have answered at that moment , if anyone had asked you a question - for instance , what year it is ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` And what year is it , Anno Domini , do you know ? '' 
Grigory stood with a perplexed face , looking straight at his tormentor . 
Strange to say , it appeared he really did not know what year it was . 
`` But perhaps you can tell me how many fingers you have on your hands ? '' 
`` I am a servant , '' Grigory said suddenly , in a loud and distinct voice . 
`` If my betters think fit to make game of me , it is my duty to suffer it . '' 
Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback , and the President intervened , reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions . 
Fetyukovitch bowed with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
The public and the jury , of course , were left with a grain of doubt in their minds as to the evidence of a man who might , while undergoing a certain cure , have seen `` the gates of heaven , '' and who did not even know what year he was living in . 
But before Grigory left the box another episode occurred . 
The President , turning to the prisoner , asked him whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the last witness . 
`` Except about the door , all he has said is true , '' cried Mitya , in a loud voice . 
`` For combing the lice off me , I thank him ; for forgiving my blows , I thank him . 
The old man has been honest all his life and as faithful to my father as seven hundred poodles . '' 
`` Prisoner , be careful in your language , '' the President admonished him . 
`` I am not a poodle , '' Grigory muttered . 
`` All right , it 's I am a poodle myself , '' cried Mitya . 
`` If it 's an insult , I take it to myself and I beg his pardon . 
I was a beast and cruel to him . 
I was cruel to Aesop too . '' 
`` What Aesop ? '' 
the President asked sternly again . 
`` Oh , Pierrot ... my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very sternly to be more careful in his language . 
`` You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges . '' 
The counsel for the defence was equally clever in dealing with the evidence of Rakitin . 
I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance . 
It appeared that he knew everything ; his knowledge was amazing , he had been everywhere , seen everything , talked to everybody , knew every detail of the biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs . 
Of the envelope , it is true , he had only heard from Mitya himself . 
But he described minutely Mitya 's exploits in the Metropolis , all his compromising doings and sayings , and told the story of Captain Snegiryov 's `` wisp of tow . '' 
But even Rakitin could say nothing positive about Mitya 's inheritance , and confined himself to contemptuous generalities . 
`` Who could tell which of them was to blame , and which was in debt to the other , with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no one could make head or tail of it ? '' 
He attributed the tragic crime to the habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia , due to the lack of appropriate institutions . 
He was , in fact , allowed some latitude of speech . 
This was the first occasion on which Rakitin showed what he could do , and attracted notice . 
The prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a magazine article on the case , and afterwards in his speech , as we shall see later , quoted some ideas from the article , showing that he had seen it already . 
The picture drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister one , and greatly strengthened the case for the prosecution . 
Altogether , Rakatin 's discourse fascinated the public by its independence and the extraordinary nobility of its ideas . 
There were even two or three outbreaks of applause when he spoke of serfdom and the distressed condition of Russia . 
But Rakitin , in his youthful ardour , made a slight blunder , of which the counsel for the defence at once adroitly took advantage . 
