He was fond of the boy , though he would have felt it beneath him to try and win him over , and was severe and strict with him in class . 
Kolya , too , kept him at a respectful distance . 
He learned his lessons perfectly ; he was second in his class , was reserved with Dardanelov , and the whole class firmly believed that Kolya was so good at universal history that he could `` beat '' even Dardanelov . 
Kolya did indeed ask him the question , `` Who founded Troy ? '' 
to which Dardanelov had made a very vague reply , referring to the movements and migrations of races , to the remoteness of the period , to the mythical legends . 
But the question , `` Who had founded Troy ? '' 
that is , what individuals , he could not answer , and even for some reason regarded the question as idle and frivolous . 
But the boys remained convinced that Dardanelov did not know who founded Troy . 
Kolya had read of the founders of Troy in Smaragdov , whose history was among the After the incident on the railway a certain change came over Kolya 's attitude to his mother . 
When Anna Fyodorovna -LRB- Madame Krassotkin -RRB- heard of her son 's exploit , she almost went out of her mind with horror . 
She had such terrible attacks of hysterics , lasting with intervals for several days , that Kolya , seriously alarmed at last , promised on his honour that such pranks should never be repeated . 
He swore on his knees before the holy image , and swore by the memory of his father , at Madame Krassotkin 's instance , and the `` manly '' Kolya burst into tears like a boy of six . 
And all that day the mother and son were constantly rushing into each other 's arms sobbing . 
Next day Kolya woke up as `` unfeeling '' as before , but he had become more silent , more modest , sterner , and more thoughtful . 
Six weeks later , it is true , he got into another scrape , which even brought his name to the ears of our Justice of the Peace , but it was a scrape of quite another kind , amusing , foolish , and he did not , as it turned out , take the leading part in it , but was only implicated in it . 
But of this later . 
His mother still fretted and trembled , but the more uneasy she became , the greater were the hopes of Dardanelov . 
It must be noted that Kolya understood and divined what was in Dardanelov 's heart and , of course , despised him profoundly for his `` feelings '' ; he had in the past been so tactless as to show this contempt before his mother , hinting vaguely that he knew what Dardanelov was after . 
But from the time of the railway incident his behaviour in this respect also was changed ; he did not allow himself the remotest allusion to the subject and began to speak more respectfully of Dardanelov before his mother , which the sensitive woman at once appreciated with boundless gratitude . 
But at the slightest mention of Dardanelov by a visitor in Kolya 's presence , she would flush as pink as a rose . 
At such moments Kolya would either stare out of the window scowling , or would investigate the state of his boots , or would shout angrily for `` Perezvon , '' the big , shaggy , mangy dog , which he had picked up a month before , brought home , and kept for some reason secretly indoors , not showing him to any of his schoolfellows . 
He bullied him frightfully , teaching him all sorts of tricks , so that the poor dog howled for him whenever he was absent at school , and when he came in , whined with delight , rushed about as if he were crazy , begged , lay down on the ground pretending to be dead , and so on ; in fact , showed all the tricks he had taught him , not at the word of command , but simply from the zeal of his excited and grateful heart . 
I have forgotten , by the way , to mention that Kolya Krassotkin was the boy stabbed with a penknife by the boy already known to the reader as the son of Captain Snegiryov . 
Ilusha had been defending his father when the schoolboys jeered at him , shouting the nickname `` wisp of tow . '' 
Children AND so on that frosty , snowy , and windy day in November , Kolya Krassotkin was sitting at home . 
It was Sunday and there was no school . 
It had just struck eleven , and he particularly wanted to go out `` on very urgent business , '' but he was left alone in charge of the house , for it so happened that all its elder inmates were absent owing to a sudden and singular event . 
Madame Krassotkin had let two little rooms , separated from the rest of the house by a passage , to a doctor 's wife with her two small children . 
This lady was the same age as Anna Fyodorovna , and a great friend of hers . 
Her husband , the doctor , had taken his departure twelve months before , going first to Orenburg and then to Tashkend , and for the last six months she had not heard a word from him . 
Had it not been for her friendship with Madame Krassotkin , which was some consolation to the forsaken lady , she would certainly have completely dissolved away in tears . 
And now , to add to her misfortunes , Katerina , her only servant , was suddenly moved the evening before to announce , to her mistress 's amazement , that she proposed to bring a child into the world before morning . 
It seemed almost miraculous to everyone that no one had noticed the probability of it before . 
The astounded doctor 's wife decided to move Katerina while there was still time to an establishment in the town kept by a midwife for such emergencies . 
As she set great store by her servant , she promptly carried out this plan and remained there looking after her . 
By the morning all Madame Krassotkin 's friendly sympathy and energy were called upon to render assistance and appeal to someone for help in the case . 
So both the ladies were absent from home , the Krassotkins ' servant , Agafya , had gone out to the market , and Kolya was thus left for a time to protect and look after `` the kids , '' that is , the son and daughter of the doctor 's wife , who were left alone . 
Kolya was not afraid of taking care of the house , besides he had Perezvon , who had been told to lie flat , without moving , under the bench in the hall . 
Every time Kolya , walking to and fro through the rooms , came into the hall , the dog shook his head and gave two loud and insinuating taps on the floor with his tail , but alas ! 
the whistle did not sound to release him . 
Kolya looked sternly at the luckless dog , who relapsed again into obedient rigidity . 
The one thing that troubled Kolya was `` the kids . '' 
He looked , of course , with the utmost scorn on Katerina 's unexpected adventure , but he was very fond of the bereaved `` kiddies , '' and had already taken them a picture-book . 
Nastya , the elder , a girl of eight , could read , and Kostya , the boy , aged seven , was very fond of being read to by her . 
Krassotkin could , of course , have provided more diverting entertainment for them . 
He could have made them stand side by side and played soldiers with them , or sent them hiding all over the house . 
He had done so more than once before and was not above doing it , so much so that a report once spread at school that Krassotkin played horses with the little lodgers at home , prancing with his head on one side like a trace-horse . 
But Krassotkin haughtily parried this thrust , pointing out that to play horses with boys of one 's own age , boys of thirteen , would certainly be disgraceful `` at this date , '' but that he did it for the sake of `` the kids '' because he liked them , and no one had a right to call him to account for his feelings . 
The two `` kids '' adored him . 
But on this occasion he was in no mood for games . 
He had very important business of his own before him , something almost mysterious . 
Meanwhile time was passing and Agafya , with whom he could have left the children , would not come back from market . 
He had several times already crossed the passage , opened the door of the lodgers ' room and looked anxiously at `` the kids '' who were sitting over the book , as he had bidden them . 
Every time he opened the door they grinned at him , hoping he would come in and would do something delightful and amusing . 
But Kolya was bothered and did not go in . 
At last it struck eleven and he made up his mind , once for all , that if that `` damned '' Agafya did not come back within ten minutes he should go out without waiting for her , making `` the kids '' promise , of course , to be brave when he was away , not to be naughty , not to cry from fright . 
With this idea he put on his wadded winter overcoat with its catskin fur collar , slung his satchel round his shoulder , and , regardless of his mother 's constantly reiterated entreaties that he would always put on goloshes in such cold weather , he looked at them contemptuously as he crossed the hall and went out with only his boots on . 
Perezvon , seeing him in his outdoor clothes , began tapping nervously , yet vigorously , on the floor with his tail . 
Twitching all over , he even uttered a plaintive whine . 
But Kolya , seeing his dog 's passionate excitement , decided that it was a breach of discipline , kept him for another minute under the bench , and only when he had opened the door into the passage , whistled for him . 
The dog leapt up like a mad creature and rushed bounding before him rapturously . 
Kolya opened the door to peep at `` the kids . '' 
They were both sitting as before at the table , not reading but warmly disputing about something . 
The children often argued together about various exciting problems of life , and Nastya , being the elder , always got the best of it . 
If Kostya did not agree with her , he almost always appealed to Kolya Krassotkin , and his verdict was regarded as infallible by both of them . 
This time the `` kids '' ' discussion rather interested Krassotkin , and he stood still in the passage to listen . 
The children saw he was listening and that made them dispute with even greater energy . 
`` I shall never , never believe , '' Nastya prattled , `` that the old women find babies among the cabbages in the kitchen garden . 
It 's winter now and there are no cabbages , and so the old woman could n't have taken Katerina a daughter . '' 
Kolya whistled to himself . 
`` Or perhaps they do bring babies from somewhere , but only to those who are married . '' 
Kostya stared at Nastya and listened , pondering profoundly . 
`` Nastya , how silly you are ! '' 
he said at last , firmly and calmly . 
`` How can Katerina have a baby when she is n't married ? '' 
Nastya was exasperated . 
`` You know nothing about it , '' she snapped irritably . 
`` Perhaps she has a husband , only he is in prison , so now she 's got a baby . '' 
`` But is her husband in prison ? '' 
the matter-of-fact Kostya inquired gravely . 
`` Or , I tell you what , '' Nastya interrupted impulsively , completely rejecting and forgetting her first hypothesis . 
`` She has n't a husband , you are right there , but she wants to be married , and so she 's been thinking of getting married , and thinking and thinking of it till now she 's got it , that is , not a husband but a baby . '' 
`` Well , perhaps so , '' Kostya agreed , entirely vanquished . 
`` But you did n't say so before . 
So how could I tell ? '' 
`` Come , kiddies , '' said Kolya , stepping into the room . 
`` You 're terrible people , I see . '' 
`` And Perezvon with you ! '' 
grinned Kostya , and began snapping his fingers and calling Perezvon . 
`` I am in a difficulty , kids , '' Krassotkin began solemnly , `` and you must help me . 
Agafya must have broken her leg , since she has not turned up till now , that 's certain . 
I must go out . 
Will you let me go ? '' 
The children looked anxiously at one another . 
Their smiling faces showed signs of uneasiness , but they did not yet fully grasp what was expected of them . 
`` You wo n't be naughty while I am gone ? 
You wo n't climb on the cupboard and break your legs ? 
You wo n't be frightened alone and cry ? '' 
A look of profound despondency came into the children 's faces . 
`` And I could show you something as a reward , a little copper cannon which can be fired with real gunpowder . '' 
