And they will have no secrets from us . 
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses , to have or not to have children according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient - and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully . 
The most painful secrets of their conscience , all , all they will bring to us , and we shall have an answer for all . 
And they will be glad to believe our answer , for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves . 
And all will be happy , all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them . 
For only we , we who guard the mystery , shall be unhappy . 
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes , and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil . 
Peacefully they will die , peacefully they will expire in Thy name , and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death . 
But we shall keep the secret , and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity . 
Though if there were anything in the other world , it certainly would not be for such as they . 
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory , Thou wilt come with Thy chosen , the proud and strong , but we will say that they have only saved themselves , but we have saved all . 
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast , and holds in her hands the mystery , shall be put to shame , that the weak will rise up again , and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body . 
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin . 
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say : `` Judge us if Thou canst and darest . '' 
Know that I fear Thee not . 
Know that I too have been in the wilderness , I too have lived on roots and locusts , I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men , and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect , among the strong and powerful , thirsting `` to make up the number . '' 
But I awakened and would not serve madness . 
I turned back and joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work . 
I left the proud and went back to the humble , for the happiness of the humble . 
What I say to Thee will come to pass , and our dominion will be built up . 
I repeat , to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us . 
For if anyone has ever deserved our fires , it is Thou . 
To-morrow I shall burn Thee . 
Dixi . ' '' 
* * I have spoken . 
Ivan stopped . 
He was carried away as he talked , and spoke with excitement ; when he had finished , he suddenly smiled . 
Alyosha had listened in silence ; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting , but restrained himself . 
Now his words came with a rush . 
`` But ... that 's absurd ! '' 
he cried , flushing . 
`` Your poem is in praise of Jesus , not in blame of Him - as you meant it to be . 
And who will believe you about freedom ? 
Is that the way to understand it ? 
That 's not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church ... . 
That 's Rome , and not even the whole of Rome , it 's false-those are the worst of the Catholics the Inquisitors , the Jesuits ! 
... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor . 
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves ? 
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind ? 
When have they been seen ? 
We know the Jesuits , they are spoken ill of , but surely they are not what you describe ? 
They are not that at all , not at all ... . 
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future , with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that 's their ideal , but there 's no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it ... . 
It 's simple lust of power , of filthy earthly gain , of domination-something like a universal serfdom with them as masters-that 's all they stand for . 
They do n't even believe in God perhaps . 
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy . '' 
`` Stay , stay , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` how hot you are ! 
A fantasy you say , let it be so ! 
Of course it 's a fantasy . 
But allow me to say : do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power , of filthy earthly gain ? 
Is that Father Paissy 's teaching ? '' 
`` No , no , on the contrary , Father Paissy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it 's not the same , not a bit the same , '' Alyosha hastily corrected himself . 
`` A precious admission , in spite of your ` not a bit the same . ' 
I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain ? 
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity ? 
You see , only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain-if there 's only one like my old Inquisitor , who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect . 
But yet all his life he loved humanity , and suddenly his eyes were opened , and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain perfection and freedom , if at the same time one gains the conviction that millions of God 's creatures have been created as a mockery , that they will never be capable of using their freedom , that these poor rebels can never turn into giants to complete the tower , that it was not for such geese that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony . 
Seeing all that he turned back and joined - the clever people . 
Surely that could have happened ? '' 
`` Joined whom , what clever people ? '' 
cried Alyosha , completely carried away . 
`` They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets ... . 
Perhaps nothing but Atheism , that 's all their secret . 
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God , that 's his secret ! '' 
`` What if it is so ! 
At last you have guessed it . 
It 's perfectly true , it 's true that that 's the whole secret , but is n't that suffering , at least for a man like that , who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity ? 
In his old age he reached the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble , unruly , ` incomplete , empirical creatures created in jest . ' 
And so , convinced of this , he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit , the dread spirit of death and destruction , and therefore accept lying and deception , and lead men consciously to death and destruction , and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led , that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy . 
And note , the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long . 
Is not that tragic ? 
And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ` filled with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain ' - would not one such be enough to make a tragedy ? 
More than that , one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits , its highest idea . 
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement . 
Who knows , there may have been some such even among the Roman Popes . 
Who knows , perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way , is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men , existing not by chance but by agreement , as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery , to guard it from the weak and the unhappy , so as to make them happy . 
No doubt it is so , and so it must be indeed . 
I fancy that even among the Masons there 's something of the same mystery at the bottom , and that that 's why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea , while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd ... . 
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism . 
Enough of it . '' 
`` You are perhaps a Mason yourself ! '' 
broke suddenly from Alyosha . 
`` You do n't believe in God , '' he added , speaking this time very sorrowfully . 
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically . 
`` How does your poem end ? '' 
he asked , suddenly looking down . 
`` Or was it the end ? '' 
`` I meant to end it like this . 
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him . 
His silence weighed down upon him . 
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time , looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply . 
The old man longed for him to say something , however bitter and terrible . 
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips . 
That was all his answer . 
The old man shuddered . 
His lips moved . 
He went to the door , opened it , and said to Him : ` Go , and come no more ... come not at all , never , never ! ' 
And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town . 
The Prisoner went away . '' 
