And ever since then I had it in my mind . 
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now , when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter , and I asked him : ` Your Excellency , ' said I , ` can a lady 's breath be unpleasant ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered ; ` you ought to open a window-pane or open the door , for the air is not fresh here . ' 
And they all go on like that ! 
And what is my breath to them ? 
The dead smell worse still ! . ' 
I wo n't spoil the air , ' said I , ` I 'll order some slippers and go away . ' 
My darlings , do n't blame your own mother ! 
Nikolay Ilyitch , how is it I ca n't please you ? 
There 's only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me . 
Yesterday he brought me an apple . 
Forgive your own mother - forgive a poor lonely creature ! 
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you ? '' 
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs , and tears streamed down her cheeks . 
The captain rushed up to her . 
`` Mamma , mamma , my dear , give over ! 
You are not lonely . 
Everyone loves you , everyone adores you . '' 
He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face ; taking the dinner-napkin , he began wiping away her tears . 
Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes . 
`` There , you see , you hear ? '' 
he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha , pointing to the poor imbecile . 
`` I see and hear , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Father , father , how can you - with him ! 
Let him alone ! '' 
cried the boy , sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes . 
`` Do give over fooling , showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything ! 
shouted Varvara , stamping her foot with passion . 
`` Your anger is quite just this time , Varvara , and I 'll make haste to satisfy you . 
Come , put on your cap , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and I 'll put on mine . 
We will go out . 
I have a word to say to you in earnest , but not within these walls . 
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina ; I forgot to introduce her to you . 
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals , ... if you can understand . '' 
`` There he is shaking all over , as though he is in convulsions ! '' 
Varvara went on indignantly . 
`` And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now , she is a heavenly angel incarnate too , and she has good reason to call me so . 
Come along , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we must make an end . '' 
And , snatching Alyosha 's hand , he drew him out of the room into the street . 
And in the Open Air `` THE air is fresh , but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word . 
Let us walk slowly , sir . 
I should be glad of your kind interest . '' 
`` I too have something important to say to you , '' observed Alyosha , `` only I do n't know how to begin . '' 
`` To be sure you must have business with me . 
You would never have looked in upon me without some object . 
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy , and that 's hardly likely . 
And , by the way , about the boy : I could not explain to you in there , but here I will describe that scene to you . 
My tow was thicker a week ago - I mean my beard . 
That 's the nickname they give to my beard , the schoolboys most of all . 
Well , your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard , I 'd done nothing , he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me . 
He dragged me out of the tavern into the market place ; at that moment the boys were coming out of school , and with them Ilusha . 
As soon as he saw me in such a state he rushed up to me . 
` Father , ' he cried , ` father ! ' 
He caught hold of me , hugged me , tried to pull me away , crying to my assailant , ` Let go , let go , it 's my father , forgive him ! ' 
- yes , he actually cried ` forgive him . ' 
He clutched at that hand , that very hand , in his little hands and kissed it ... . 
I remember his little face at that moment , I have n't forgotten it and I never shall ! '' 
`` I swear , '' cried Alyosha , `` that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret , even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place ... . 
I 'll make him or he is no brother of mine ! 
`` Aha , then it 's only a suggestion ! 
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart . 
You should have said so . 
No , in that case allow me to tell you of your brother 's highly chivalrous soldierly generosity , for he did give expression to it at the time . 
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me : ` You are an officer , ' he said , ` and I am an officer , if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge . 
I will give satisfaction , though you are a scoundrel . ' 
That 's what he said . 
A chivalrous spirit indeed ! 
I retired with Ilusha , and that scene is a family record imprinted forever on Ilusha 's soul . 
No , it 's not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen . 
Judge for yourself . 
You 've just been in our mansion , what did you see there ? 
Three ladies , one a cripple and weak-minded , another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever . 
She is a student , dying to get back to Petersburg , to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva . 
I wo n't speak of Ilusha , he is only nine . 
I am alone in the world , and if I die , what will become of all of them ? 
I simply ask you that . 
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot , what then ? 
What will become of them ? 
And worse still , if he does n't kill me but only cripples me : I could n't work , but I should still be a mouth to feed . 
Who would feed it and who would feed them all ? 
Must I take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets ? 
That 's what it means for me to challenge him to a duel . 
It 's silly talk and nothing else . '' 
`` He will beg your forgiveness , he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the marketplace , '' cried Alyosha again , with glowing eyes . 
`` I did think of prosecuting him , '' the captain went on , `` but look in our code , could I get much compensation for a personal injury ? 
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna * sent for me and shouted at me : ` Do n't dare to dream of it ! 
If you proceed against him , I 'll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty , and then you will be prosecuted . ' 
I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted , was n't it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
And what 's more , ' she went on , ` I 'll dismiss you for good and you 'll never earn another penny from me . 
I 'll speak to my merchant too ' -LRB- that 's what she calls her old man -RRB- ` and he will dismiss you ! ' 
And if he dismisses me , what can I earn then from anyone ? 
Those two are all I have to look to , for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me , for another reason , but he means to make use of papers I 've signed to go to law against me . 
And so I kept quiet , and you have seen our retreat . 
But now let me ask you : did Ilusha hurt your finger much ? 
I did n't like to go into it in our mansion before him . '' 
* Grushenka . 
`` Yes , very much , and he was in a great fury . 
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov , I see that now . 
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his schoolfellows ! 
It 's very dangerous . 
