I wanted to see her for one minute only ; I wanted to tell her that it has been washed away , it has gone , that blood that was weighing on my heart all night , and that I am not a murderer now ! 
Gentlemen , she is my betrothed ! '' 
he said ecstatically and reverently , looking round at them all . 
`` Oh , thank you , gentlemen ! 
Oh , in one minute you have given me new life , new heart ! 
... That old man used to carry me in his arms , gentlemen . 
He used to wash me in the tub when I was a baby three years old , abandoned by everyone , he was like a father to me ! 
... '' `` And so you - '' the investigating lawyer began . 
`` Allow me , gentlemen , allow me one minute more , '' interposed Mitya , putting his elbows on the table and covering his face with his hands . 
`` Let me have a moment to think , let me breathe , gentlemen . 
All this is horribly upsetting , horribly . 
A man is not a drum , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Drink a little more water , '' murmured Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
Mitya took his hands from his face and laughed . 
His eyes were confident . 
He seemed completely transformed in a moment . 
His whole bearing was changed ; he was once more the equal of these men , with all of whom he was acquainted , as though they had all met the day before , when nothing had happened , at some social gathering . 
We may note in passing that , on his first arrival , Mitya had been made very welcome at the police captain 's , but later , during the last month especially , Mitya had hardly called at all , and when the police captain met him , in the street , for instance , Mitya noticed that he frowned and only bowed out of politeness . 
His acquaintance with the prosecutor was less intimate , though he sometimes paid his wife , a nervous and fanciful lady , visits of politeness , without quite knowing why , and she always received him graciously and had , for some reason , taken an interest in him up to the last . 
He had not had time to get to know the investigating lawyer , though he had met him and talked to him twice , each time about the fair sex . 
`` You 're a most skilful lawyer , I see , Nikolay Parfenovitch , '' cried Mitya , laughing gaily , `` but I can help you now . 
Oh , gentlemen , I feel like a new man , and do n't be offended at my addressing you so simply and directly . 
I 'm rather drunk , too , I 'll tell you that frankly . 
I believe I 've had the honour and pleasure of meeting you , Nikolay Parfenovitch , at my kinsman Miusov 's . 
Gentlemen , gentlemen , I do n't pretend to be on equal terms with you . 
I understand , of course , in what character I am sitting before you . 
Oh , of course , there 's a horrible suspicion ... hanging over me ... if Grigory has given evidence ... . 
A horrible suspicion ! 
It 's awful , awful , I understand that ! 
But to business , gentlemen , I am ready , and we will make an end of it in one moment ; for , listen , listen , gentlemen ! 
Since I know I 'm innocent , we can put an end to it in a minute . 
Ca n't we ? 
Ca n't we ? '' 
Mitya spoke much and quickly , nervously and effusively , as though he positively took his listeners to be his best friends . 
`` So , for the present , we will write that you absolutely deny the charge brought against you , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , impressively , and bending down to the secretary he dictated to him in an undertone what to write . 
`` Write it down ? 
You want to write that down ? 
Well , write it ; I consent , I give my full consent , gentlemen , only ... do you see ? 
... Stay , stay , write this . 
Of disorderly conduct I am guilty , of violence on a poor old man I am guilty . 
And there is something else at the bottom of my heart , of which I am guilty , too but that you need not write down '' -LRB- he turned suddenly to the secretary -RRB- ; `` that 's my personal life , gentlemen , that does n't concern you , the bottom of my heart , that 's to say ... . 
But of the murder of my old father I 'm not guilty . 
That 's a wild idea . 
It 's quite a wild idea ! 
... I will prove you that and you 'll be convinced directly ... . 
You will laugh , gentlemen . 
You 'll laugh yourselves at your suspicion ! 
... '' `` Be calm , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' said the investigating lawyer evidently trying to allay Mitya 's excitement by his own composure . 
`` Before we go on with our inquiry , I should like , if you will consent to answer , to hear you confirm the statement that you disliked your father , Fyodor Pavlovitch , that you were involved in continual disputes with him . 
Here at least , a quarter of an hour ago , you exclaimed that you wanted to kill him : ' I did n't kill him , ' you said , ` but I wanted to kill him . ' '' 
`` Did I exclaim that ? 
Ach , that may be so , gentlemen ! 
Yes , unhappily , I did want to kill him ... many times I wanted to ... unhappily , unhappily ! '' 
`` You wanted to . 
Would you consent to explain what motives precisely led you to such a sentiment of hatred for your parent ? '' 
`` What is there to explain , gentlemen ? '' 
Mitya shrugged his shoulders sullenly , looking down . 
`` I have never concealed my feelings . 
All the town knows about it - everyone knows in the tavern . 
Only lately I declared them in Father Zossima 's cell . 
And the very same day , in the evening I beat my father . 
I nearly killed him , and I swore I 'd come again and kill him , before witnesses ... . 
Oh , a thousand witnesses ! 
I 've been shouting it aloud for the last month , anyone can tell you that ! 
... The fact stares you in the face , it speaks for itself , it cries aloud , but feelings , gentlemen , feelings are another matter . 
You see , gentlemen '' - Mitya frowned - `` it seemed to me that about feelings you 've no right to question me . 
I know that you are bound by your office , I quite understand that , but that 's my affair , my private , intimate affair , yet ... since I have n't concealed my feelings in the past ... in the tavern , for instance , I 've talked to everyone , so ... so I wo n't make a secret of it now . 
You see , I understand , gentlemen , that there are terrible facts against me in this business . 
I told everyone that I 'd kill him , and now , all of a sudden , he 's been killed . 
So it must have been me ! 
Ha ha ! 
I can make allowances for you , gentlemen , I can quite make allowances . 
I 'm struck all of a heap myself , for who can have murdered him , if not I ? 
That 's what it comes to , is n't it ? 
If not I , who can it be , who ? 
Gentlemen , I want to know , I insist on knowing ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Where was he murdered ? 
How was he murdered ? 
How , and with what ? 
Tell me , '' he asked quickly , looking at the two lawyers . 
`` We found him in his study , lying on his back on the floor , with his head battered in , '' said the prosecutor . 
`` That 's horrible ! '' 
Mitya shuddered and , putting his elbows on the table , hid his face in his right hand . 
`` We will continue , '' interposed Nikolay Parfenovitch . 
`` So what was it that impelled you to this sentiment of hatred ? 
You have asserted in public , I believe , that it was based upon jealousy ? '' 
`` Well , yes , jealousy . 
not only jealousy . '' 
`` Disputes about money ? '' 
`` Yes , about money , too . '' 
`` There was a dispute about three thousand roubles , I think , which you claimed as part of your inheritance ? '' 
`` Three thousand ! 
More , more , '' cried Mitya hotly ; `` more than six thousand , more than ten , perhaps . 
I told everyone so , shouted it at them . 
But I made up my mind to let it go at three thousand . 
I was desperately in need of that three thousand ... so the bundle of notes for three thousand that I knew he kept under his pillow , ready for Grushenka , I considered as simply stolen from me . 
Yes , gentlemen , I looked upon it as mine , as my own property ... '' The prosecutor looked significantly at the investigating lawyer , and had time to wink at him on the sly . 
`` We will return to that subject later , '' said the lawyer promptly . 
`` You will allow us to note that point and write it down ; that you looked upon that money as your own property ? '' 
