As soon as Alyosha had gone , Lise unbolted the door , opened it a little , put her finger in the crack and slammed the door with all her might , pinching her finger . 
Ten seconds after , releasing her finger , she walked softly , slowly to her chair , sat up straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at the blood that oozed from under the nail . 
Her lips were quivering and she kept whispering rapidly to herself : `` I am a wretch , wretch , wretch , wretch ! '' 
A Hymn and a Secret IT was quite late -LRB- days are short in November -RRB- when Alyosha rang at the prison gate . 
It was beginning to get dusk . 
But Alyosha knew that he would be admitted without difficulty . 
Things were managed in our little town , as everywhere else . 
At first , of course , on the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry , relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviews with Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities . 
But later , though the formalities were not relaxed , exceptions were made for some , at least , of Mitya 's visitors . 
So much so , that sometimes the interviews with the prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically tete-a-tete . 
These exceptions , however , were few in number ; only Grushenka , Alyosha and Rakitin were treated like this . 
But the captain of the police , Mihail Mihailovitch , was very favourably disposed to Grushenka . 
His abuse of her at Mokroe weighed on the old man 's conscience , and when he learned the whole story , he completely changed his view of her . 
And strange to say , though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt , yet after Mitya was once in prison , the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him . 
`` He was a man of good heart , perhaps , '' he thought , `` who had come to grief from drinking and dissipation . '' 
His first horror had been succeeded by pity . 
As for Alyosha , the police captain was very fond of him and had known him for a long time . 
Rakitin , who had of late taken to coming very often to see the prisoner , was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the `` police captain 's young ladies , '' as he called them , and was always hanging about their house . 
He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent , too , who , though scrupulous in the performance of his duties , was a kindhearted old man . 
Alyosha , again , had an intimate acquaintance of long standing with the superintendent , who was fond of talking to him , generally on sacred subjects . 
He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch , and stood in awe of his opinion , though he was a great philosopher himself ; `` self-taught , '' of course . 
But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him . 
During the last year the old man had taken to studying the Apocryphal Gospels , and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend . 
He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hours together with him and with the monks . 
So even if Alyosha were late at the prison , he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was made easy . 
Besides , everyone in the prison , down to the humblest warder , had grown used to Alyosha . 
The sentry , of course , did not trouble him so long as the authorities were satisfied . 
When Mitya was summoned from his cell , he always went downstairs , to the place set aside for interviews . 
As Alyosha entered the room he came upon Rakitin , who was just taking leave of Mitya . 
They were both talking loudly . 
Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out , while Rakitin seemed grumbling . 
Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha , especially of late . 
He scarcely spoke to him , and bowed to him stiffly . 
Seeing Alyosha enter now , he frowned and looked away , as though he were entirely absorbed in buttoning his big , warm , fur-trimmed overcoat . 
Then he began looking at once for his umbrella . 
`` I must mind not to forget my belongings , '' he muttered , simply to say something . 
`` Mind you do n't forget other people 's belongings , '' said Mitya , as a joke , and laughed at once at his own wit . 
Rakitin fired up instantly . 
`` You 'd better give that advice to your own family , who 've always been a slave-driving lot , and not to Rakitin , '' he cried , suddenly trembling with anger . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
I was joking , '' cried Mitya . 
`` Damn it all ! 
They are all like that . '' 
He turned to Alyosha , nodding towards Rakitin 's hurriedly retreating figure . 
`` He was sitting here , laughing and cheerful , and all at once he boils up like that . 
He did n't even nod to you . 
Have you broken with him completely ? 
Why are you so late ? 
I 've not been simply waiting , but thirsting for you the whole morning . 
But never mind . 
We 'll make up for it now . '' 
`` Why does he come here so often ? 
Surely you are not such great friends ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
He , too , nodded at the door through which Rakitin had disappeared . 
`` Great friends with Rakitin ? 
No , not as much as that . 
Is it likely - a pig like that ? 
He considers I am ... a blackguard . 
They ca n't understand a joke either , that 's the worst of such people . 
They never understand a joke , and their souls are dry , dry and flat ; they remind me of prison walls when I was first brought here . 
But he is a clever fellow , very clever . 
Well , Alexey , it 's all over with me now . '' 
He sat down on the bench and made Alyosha sit down beside him . 
`` Yes , the trial 's to-morrow . 
Are you so hopeless , brother ? '' 
Alyosha said , with an apprehensive feeling . 
`` What are you talking about ? '' 
said Mitya , looking at him rather uncertainly . 
`` Oh , you mean the trial ! 
Damn it all ! 
Till now we 've been talking of things that do n't matter , about this trial , but I have n't said a word to you about the chief thing . 
Yes , the trial is to-morrow ; but it was n't the trial I meant , when I said it was all over with me . 
Why do you look at me so critically ? '' 
`` What do you mean , Mitya ? '' 
`` Ideas , ideas , that 's all ! 
Ethics ! 
What is ethics ? '' 
`` Ethics ? '' 
asked Alyosha , wondering . 
`` Yes ; is it a science ? '' 
`` Yes , there is such a science ... but ... I confess I ca n't explain to you what sort of science it is . '' 
`` Rakitin knows . 
Rakitin knows a lot , damn him ! 
He 's not going to be a monk . 
He means to go to Petersburg . 
There he 'll go in for criticism of an elevating tendency . 
Who knows , he may be of use and make his own career , too . 
Ough ! 
they are first-rate , these people , at making a career ! 
Damn ethics , I am done for , Alexey , I am , you man of God ! 
I love you more than anyone . 
It makes my heart yearn to look at you . 
Who was Karl Bernard ? '' 
`` Karl Bernard ? '' 
Alyosha was surprised again . 
`` No , not Karl . 
Stay , I made a mistake . 
Claude Bernard . 
What was he ? 
