Salvation will come from the people , from their faith and their meekness . 
Fathers and teachers , watch over the people 's faith and this will not be a dream . 
I 've been struck all my life in our great people by their dignity , their true and seemly dignity . 
I 've seen it myself , I can testify to it , I 've seen it and marvelled at it , I 've seen it in spite of the degraded sins and poverty-stricken appearance of our peasantry . 
They are not servile , and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in manner and bearing , yet without insolence , and not revengeful and not envious . 
`` You are rich and noble , you are clever and talented , well , be so , God bless you . 
I respect you , but I know that I too am a man . 
By the very fact that I respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man . '' 
In truth if they do n't say this -LRB- for they do n't know how to say this yet -RRB- , that is how they act . 
I have seen it myself , I have known it myself , and , would you believe it , the poorer our Russian peasant is , the more noticeable is that serene goodness , for the rich among them are for the most part corrupted already , and much of that is due to our carelessness and indifference . 
But God will save His people , for Russia is great in her humility . 
I dream of seeing , and seem to see clearly already , our future . 
It will come to pass that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by being ashamed of his riches before the poor , and the poor , seeing his humility , will understand and give way before him , will respond joyfully and kindly to his honourable shame . 
Believe me that it will end in that ; things are moving to that . 
Equality is to be found only in the spiritual dignity of man , and that will only be understood among us . 
If we were brothers , there would be fraternity , but before that they will never agree about the division of wealth . 
We preserve the image of Christ , and it will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world . 
So may it be , so may it be ! 
Fathers and teachers , a touching incident befell me once . 
In my wanderings I met in the town of K. my old orderly , Afanasy . 
It was eight years since I had parted from him . 
He chanced to see me in the market-place , recognised me , ran up to me , and how delighted he was ! 
He simply pounced on me : `` Master dear , is it you ? 
Is it really you I see ? '' 
He took me home with him . 
He was no longer in the army , he was married and already had two little children . 
He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in the market-place . 
His room was poor , but bright and clean . 
He made me sit down , set the samovar , sent for his wife , as though my appearance were a festival for them . 
He brought me his children : `` Bless them , Father . '' 
`` Is it for me to bless them ? 
I am only a humble monk . 
I will pray for them . 
And for you , Afanasy Pavlovitch , I have prayed every day since that day , for it all came from you , '' said I. And I explained that to him as well as I could . 
And what do you think ? 
The man kept gazing at me and could not believe that I , his former master , an officer , was now before him in such a guise and position ; it made him shed tears . 
`` Why are you weeping ? '' 
said I , `` better rejoice over me , dear friend , whom I can never forget , for my path is a glad and joyful one . '' 
He did not say much , but kept sighing and shaking his head over me tenderly . 
`` What has become of your fortune ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I gave it to the monastery , '' I answered ; `` we live in common . '' 
After tea I began saying good-bye , and suddenly he brought out half a rouble as an offering to the monastery , and another half-rouble I saw him thrusting hurriedly into my hand : `` That 's for you in your wanderings , it may be of use to you , Father . '' 
I took his half-rouble , bowed to him and his wife , and went out rejoicing . 
And on my way I thought : `` Here we are both now , he at home and I on the road , sighing and shaking our heads , no doubt , and yet smiling joyfully in the gladness of our hearts , remembering how God brought about our meeting . '' 
I have never seen him again since then . 
I had been his master and he my servant , but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts , there was a great human bond between us . 
I have thought a great deal about that , and now what I think is this : Is it so inconceivable that that grand and simple-hearted unity might in due time become universal among the Russian people ? 
I believe that it will come to pass and that the time is at hand . 
And of servants I will add this : In old days when I was young I was often angry with servants ; `` the cook had served something too hot , the orderly had not brushed my clothes . '' 
But what taught me better then was a thought of my dear brother 's , which I had heard from him in childhood : `` Am I worth it , that another should serve me and be ordered about by me in his poverty and ignorance ? '' 
And I wondered at the time that such simple and self-evident ideas should be so slow to occur to our minds . 
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world , but act so that your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant . 
And why can not I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it , and that without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his ? 
Why should not my servant be like my own kindred , so that I may take him into my family and rejoice in doing so ? 
Even now this can be done , but it will lead to the grand unity of men in the future , when a man will not seek servants for himself , or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as he does now , but on the contrary , will long with his whole heart to be the servant of all , as the Gospel teaches . 
And can it be a dream , that in the end man will find his joy only in deeds of light and mercy , and not in cruel pleasures as now , in gluttony , fornication , ostentation , boasting and envious rivalry of one with the other ? 
I firmly believe that it is not and that the time is at hand . 
People laugh and ask : `` When will that time come and does it look like coming ? '' 
I believe that with Christ 's help we shall accomplish this great thing . 
And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of man which were unthinkable ten years before they appeared ! 
Yet when their destined hour had come , they came forth and spread over the whole earth . 
So it will be with us , and our people will shine forth in the world , and all men will say : `` The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone of the building . '' 
And we may ask the scornful themselves : If our hope is a dream , when will you build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone , without Christ ? 
If they declare that it is they who are advancing towards unity , only the most simple-hearted among them believe it , so that one may positively marvel at such simplicity . 
Of a truth , they have more fantastic dreams than we . 
They aim at justice , but , denying Christ , they will end by flooding the earth with blood , for blood cries out for blood , and he that taketh up the sword shall perish by the sword . 
And if it were not for Christ 's covenant , they would slaughter one another down to the last two men on earth . 
And those two last men would not be able to restrain each other in their pride , and the one would slay the other and then himself . 
And that would come to pass , were it not for the promise of Christ that for the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened . 
While I was still wearing an officer 's uniform after my duel , I talked about servants in general society , and I remember everyone was amazed at me . 
`` What ! '' 
they asked , `` are we to make our servants sit down on the sofa and offer them tea ? '' 
And I answered them : `` Why not , sometimes at least ? '' 
Everyone laughed . 
Their question was frivolous and my answer was not clear ; but the thought in it was to some extent right . 
-LRB- g -RRB- Of Prayer , of Love , and of Contact with other Worlds . 
Young man , be not forgetful of prayer . 
Every time you pray , if your prayer is sincere , there will be new feeling and new meaning in it , which will give you fresh courage , and you will understand that prayer is an education . 
Remember , too , every day , and whenever you can , repeat to yourself , `` Lord , have mercy on all who appear before Thee to-day . '' 
For every hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth , and their souls appear before God . 
And how many of them depart in solitude , unknown , sad , dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whether they have lived or not ! 
And behold , from the other end of the earth perhaps , your prayer for their rest will rise up to God though you knew them not nor they you . 
How touching it must be to a soul standing in dread before the Lord to feel at that instant that , for him too , there is one to pray , that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too ! 
And God will look on you both more graciously , for if you have had so much pity on him , how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving and merciful than you ! 
And He will forgive him for your sake . 
Brothers , have no fear of men 's sin . 
Love a man even in his sin , for that is the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth . 
Love all God 's creation , the whole and every grain of sand in it . 
Love every leaf , every ray of God 's light . 
Love the animals , love the plants , love everything . 
If you love everything , you will perceive the divine mystery in things . 
Once you perceive it , you will begin to comprehend it better every day . 
And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all-embracing love . 
Love the animals : God has given them the rudiments of thought and joy untroubled . 
Do not trouble it , do n't harass them , do n't deprive them of their happiness , do n't work against God 's intent . 
Man , do not pride yourself on superiority to the animals ; they are without sin , and you , with your greatness , defile the earth by your appearance on it , and leave the traces of your foulness after you - alas , it is true of almost every one of us ! 
Love children especially , for they too are sinless like the angels ; they live to soften and purify our hearts and , as it were , to guide us . 
Woe to him who offends a child ! 
Father Anfim taught me to love children . 
