`` You are talking nonsense , I see , and I do n't quite understand you , '' he said softly , but with a sort of menace . 
`` Do you mean to pretend to be ill to-morrow for three days , eh ? '' 
Smerdyakov , who was looking at the ground again , and playing with the toe of his right foot , set the foot down , moved the left one forward , and , grinning , articulated : `` If I were able to play such a trick , that is , pretend to have a fit - and it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them - I should have a perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death . 
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill , his honour ca n't blame a sick man for not telling him . 
He 'd be ashamed to . '' 
`` Hang it all ! '' 
Ivan cried , his face working with anger , `` Why are you always in such a funk for your life ? 
All my brother Dmitri 's threats are only hasty words and mean nothing . 
He wo n't kill you ; it 's not you he 'll kill ! '' 
`` He 'd kill me first of all , like a fly . 
But even more than that , I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father . '' 
`` Why should you be taken for an accomplice ? '' 
`` They 'll think I am an accomplice , because I let him know the signals as a great secret . '' 
`` What signals ? 
Whom did you tell ? 
Confound you , speak more plainly . '' 
`` I 'm bound to admit the fact , '' Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure , `` that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business . 
As you know yourself -LRB- if only you do know it -RRB- he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on . 
Of late you 've been going upstairs to your room early every evening , and yesterday you did not come down at all , and so perhaps you do n't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night , and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he wo n't open to him till he hears his voice . 
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come , because I wait upon him alone in his room now . 
That 's the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began . 
But at night , by his orders , I go away to the lodge so that I do n't get to sleep till midnight , but am on the watch , getting up and walking about the yard , waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come . 
For the last few days he 's been perfectly frantic expecting her . 
What he argues is , she is afraid of him , Dmitri Fyodorovitch -LRB- Mitya , as he calls him -RRB- , ` and so , ' says he , ` she 'll come the back-way , late at night , to me . 
You look out for her , ' says he , 'till midnight and later ; and if she does come , you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden . 
Knock at first twice , rather gently , and then three times more quickly , then , ' says he , ' I shall understand at once that she has come , and will open the door to you quietly . ' 
Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens . 
At first , two knocks , and then , after an interval , another much louder . 
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him , and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him . 
That 's all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna ca n't come herself , but sends a message . 
Besides , Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come , too , so I must let him know he is near . 
His honour is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time , I should be bound to let him know at once , knocking three times . 
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , while the second signal of three knocks means ` something important to tell you . ' 
His honour has shown me them several times and explained them . 
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honour , so he 'd open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out -LRB- he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud -RRB- . 
Well , those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too , now . '' 
`` How are they known ? 
Did you tell him ? 
How dared you tell him ? '' 
`` It was through fright I did it . 
How could I dare to keep it back from him ? 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day , ` You are deceiving me , you are hiding something from me ! 
I 'll break both your legs for you . ' 
So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion , and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him , but was telling him all I could . '' 
`` If you think that he 'll make use of those signals and try to get in , do n't let him in . '' 
`` But if I should be laid up with a fit , how can I prevent him coming in then , even if I dared prevent him , knowing how desperate he is ? '' 
`` Hang it ! 
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit , confound you ? 
Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` How could I dare laugh at you ? 
I am in no laughing humour with this fear on me . 
I feel I am going to have a fit . 
I have a presentiment . 
Fright alone will bring it on . '' 
`` Confound it ! 
If you are laid up , Grigory will be on the watch . 
Let Grigory know beforehand ; he will be sure not to let him in . '' 
`` I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master . 
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him , he has been ill ever since yesterday , and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow . 
They 've just arranged it . 
It 's a very strange remedy of hers . 
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it . 
It 's a strong thing made from some herb . 
She has the secret of it , and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago 's so bad he is almost paralysed by it . 
Then she takes a towel , wets it with the stuff , and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it 's quite red and swollen , and what 's left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer ; but not quite all , for on such occasions she leaves some for herself , and drinks it herself . 
And as they never take strong drink , I assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time . 
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it , but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it . 
So , if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow , they wo n't hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 'll be asleep . '' 
`` What a rigmarole ! 
And it all seems to happen at once , as though it were planned . 
You 'll have a fit and they 'll both be unconscious , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But are n't you trying to arrange it so ? '' 
broke from him suddenly , and he frowned threateningly . 
`` How could I ? 
... And why should I , when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans ? 
... If he means to do anything , he 'll do it ; but if not , I sha n't be thrusting him upon his father . '' 
`` And why should he go to father , especially on the sly , if , as you say yourself , Agrafena Alexandrovna wo n't come at all ? '' 
Ivan went on , turning white with anger . 
`` You say that yourself , and all the while I 've been here , I 've felt sure it was all the old man 's fancy , and the creature wo n't come to him . 
Why should Dmitri break in on him if she does n't come ? 
Speak , I want to know what you are thinking ! '' 
`` You know yourself why he 'll come . 
What 's the use of what I think ? 
His honour will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps , and he 'll dash in , as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms , to see whether she has n't escaped him on the sly . 
He is perfectly well aware , too , that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it , tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals . 
On it is written in his own hand ` To my angel Grushenka , if she will come , ' to which he added three days later , ` for my little chicken . ' 
There 's no knowing what that might do . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Ivan , almost beside himself . 
`` Dmitri wo n't come to steal money and kill my father to do it . 
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka , like the frantic , savage fool he is , but he wo n't steal . '' 
`` He is in very great need of money now - the greatest need , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
You do n't know in what need he is , '' Smerdyakov explained , with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness . 
`` He looks on that three thousand as his own , too . 
He said so to me himself . 
` My father still owes me just three thousand , ' he said . 
And besides that , consider , Ivan Fyodorovitch , there is something else perfectly true . 
It 's as good as certain , so to say , that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him , if only she cares to , to marry her - the master himself , I mean , Fyodor Pavlovitch - if only she cares to , and of course she may care to . 
All I 've said is that she wo n't come , but maybe she 's looking for more than that - I mean to be mistress here . 
