She deserves what she gets . 
I shall have my own story to tell , Alexey . '' 
He smiled bitterly again . 
`` Only ... only Grusha , Grusha ! 
Good Lord ! 
Why should she have such suffering to bear ? '' 
he exclaimed suddenly , with tears . 
`` Grusha 's killing me ; the thought of her 's killing me , killing me . 
She was with me just now ... '' `` She told me she was very much grieved by you to-day . '' 
`` I know . 
Confound my temper ! 
It was jealousy . 
I was sorry , I kissed her as she was going . 
I did n't ask her forgiveness . '' 
`` Why did n't you ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully . 
`` God preserve you , my dear boy , from ever asking forgiveness for a fault from a woman you love . 
From one you love especially , however greatly you may have been in fault . 
For a woman - devil only knows what to make of a woman ! 
I know something about them , anyway . 
But try acknowledging you are in fault to a woman . 
Say , ' I am sorry , forgive me , ' and a shower of reproaches will follow ! 
Nothing will make her forgive you simply and directly , she 'll humble you to the dust , bring forward things that have never happened , recall everything , forget nothing , add something of her own , and only then forgive you . 
And even the best , the best of them do it . 
She 'll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head . 
They are ready to flay you alive , I tell you , every one of them , all these angels without whom we can not live ! 
I tell you plainly and openly , dear boy , every decent man ought to be under some woman 's thumb . 
That 's my conviction - not conviction , but feeling . 
A man ought to be magnanimous , and it 's no disgrace to a man ! 
No disgrace to a hero , not even a Caesar ! 
But do n't ever beg her pardon all the same for anything . 
Remember that rule given you by your brother Mitya , who 's come to ruin through women . 
No , I 'd better make it up to Grusha somehow , without begging pardon . 
I worship her , Alexey , worship her . 
Only she does n't see it . 
No , she still thinks I do n't love her enough . 
And she tortures me , tortures me with her love . 
The past was nothing ! 
In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers that tortured me , but now I 've taken all her soul into my soul and through her I 've become a man myself . 
Will they marry us ? 
If they do n't , I shall die of jealousy . 
I imagine something every day ... . 
What did she say to you about me ? '' 
Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day . 
Mitya listened , made him repeat things , and seemed pleased . 
`` Then she is not angry at my being jealous ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` She is a regular woman ! 
` I 've a fierce heart myself ! ' 
Ah , I love such fierce hearts , though I ca n't bear anyone 's being jealous of me . 
I ca n't endure it . 
We shall fight . 
But I shall love her , I shall love her infinitely . 
Will they marry us ? 
Do they let convicts marry ? 
That 's the question . 
And without her I ca n't exist ... '' Mitya walked frowning across the room . 
It was almost dark . 
He suddenly seemed terribly worried . 
`` So there 's a secret , she says , a secret ? 
We have got up a plot against her , and Katya is mixed up in it , she thinks . 
No , my good Grushenka , that 's not it . 
You are very wide of the mark , in your foolish feminine way . 
Alyosha , darling , well , here goes ! 
I 'll tell you our secret ! '' 
He looked round , went close up quickly to Alyosha , who was standing before him , and whispered to him with an air of mystery , though in reality no one could hear them : the old warder was dozing in the corner , and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard . 
`` I will tell you all our secret , '' Mitya whispered hurriedly . 
`` I meant to tell you later , for how could I decide on anything without you ? 
You are everything to me . 
Though I say that Ivan is superior to us , you are my angel . 
It 's your decision will decide it . 
Perhaps it 's you that is superior and not Ivan . 
You see , it 's a question of conscience , question of the higher conscience - the secret is so important that I ca n't settle it myself , and I 've put it off till I could speak to you . 
But anyway it 's too early to decide now , for we must wait for the verdict . 
As soon as the verdict is given , you shall decide my fate . 
Do n't decide it now . 
I 'll tell you now . 
You listen , but do n't decide . 
Stand and keep quiet . 
I wo n't tell you everything . 
I 'll only tell you the idea , without details , and you keep quiet . 
Not a question , not a movement . 
You agree ? 
But , goodness , what shall I do with your eyes ? 
I 'm afraid your eyes will tell me your decision , even if you do n't speak . 
Oo ! 
I 'm afraid ! 
Alyosha , listen ! 
Ivan suggests my escaping . 
I wo n't tell you the details : it 's all been thought out : it can all be arranged . 
Hush , do n't decide . 
I should go to America with Grusha . 
You know I ca n't live without Grusha ! 
What if they wo n't let her follow me to Siberia ? 
Do they let convicts get married ? 
Ivan thinks not . 
And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a hammer ? 
I should only smash my skull with the hammer ! 
But , on the other hand , my conscience ? 
