`` I 'm drunk now , that 's what it is ... . 
And are n't you drunk ? 
And why is n't Mitya drinking ? 
Why do n't you drink , Mitya ? 
I 'm drunk , and you do n't drink ... '' `` I am drunk ! 
I 'm drunk as it is ... drunk with you ... and now I 'll be drunk with wine , too . '' 
He drank off another glass , and - he thought it strange himself - that glass made him completely drunk . 
He was suddenly drunk , although till that moment he had been quite sober , he remembered that . 
From that moment everything whirled about him , as though he were delirious . 
He walked , laughed , talked to everybody , without knowing what he was doing . 
Only one persistent burning sensation made itself felt continually , `` like a red-hot coal in his heart , '' he said afterwards . 
He went up to her , sat beside her , gazed at her , listened to her ... . 
She became very talkative , kept calling everyone to her , and beckoned to different girls out of the chorus . 
When the girl came up , she either kissed her , or made the sign of the cross over her . 
In another minute she might have cried . 
She was greatly amused by the `` little old man , '' as she called Maximov . 
He ran up every minute to kiss her hands , each little finger , '' and finally he danced another dance to an old song , which he sang himself . 
He danced with special vigour to the refrain : The little pig says - umph ! 
umph ! 
umph ! 
The little calf says - moo , moo , moo , The little duck says - quack , quack , quack , The little goose says - ga , ga , ga. . 
The hen goes strutting through the porch ; Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say , Troo-roo-roo-roo-roo , she 'll say ! 
`` Give him something , Mitya , '' said Grushenka . 
`` Give him a present , he 's poor , you know . 
Ah , the poor , the insulted ! 
... Do you know , Mitya , I shall go into a nunnery . 
No , I really shall one day . 
Alyosha said something to me to-day that I shall remember all my life ... . 
Yes ... . 
But to-day let us dance . 
To-morrow to the nunnery , but to-day we 'll dance . 
I want to play to-day , good people , and what of it ? 
God will forgive us . 
If I were God , I 'd forgive everyone : ` My dear sinners , from this day forth I forgive you . ' 
I 'm going to beg forgiveness : ` Forgive me , good people , a silly wench . ' 
I 'm a beast , that 's what I am . 
But I want to pray . 
I gave a little onion . 
Wicked as I 've been , I want to pray . 
Mitya , let them dance , do n't stop them . 
Everyone in the world is good . 
Everyone - even the worst of them . 
The world 's a nice place . 
Though we 're bad the world 's all right . 
We 're good and bad , good and bad ... . 
Come , tell me , I 've something to ask you : come here everyone , and I 'll ask you : Why am I so good ? 
You know I am good . 
I 'm very good ... . 
Come , why am I so good ? '' 
So Grushenka babbled on , getting more and more drunk . 
At last she announced that she was going to dance , too . 
She got up from her chair , staggering . 
`` Mitya , do n't give me any more wine - if I ask you , do n't give it to me . 
Wine does n't give peace . 
Everything 's going round , the stove , and everything . 
I want to dance . 
Let everyone see how I dance ... let them see how beautifully I dance ... '' She really meant it . 
She pulled a white cambric handkerchief out of her pocket , and took it by one corner in her right hand , to wave it in the dance . 
Mitya ran to and fro , the girls were quiet , and got ready to break into a dancing song at the first signal . 
Maximov , hearing that Grushenka wanted to dance , squealed with delight , and ran skipping about in front of her , humming : With legs so slim and sides so trim And its little tail curled tight . 
But Grushenka waved her handkerchief at him and drove him away . 
`` Sh-h ! 
Mitya , why do n't they come ? 
Let everyone come ... to look on . 
Call them in , too , that were locked in ... . 
Why did you lock them in ? 
Tell them I 'm going to dance . 
Let them look on , too ... '' Mitya walked with a drunken swagger to the locked door , and began knocking to the Poles with his fist . 
`` Hi , you ... Podvysotskis ! 
Come , she 's going to dance . 
She calls you . '' 
`` Lajdak ! '' 
one of the Poles shouted in reply . 
`` You 're a lajdak yourself ! 
You 're a little scoundrel , that 's what you are . '' 
`` Leave off laughing at Poland , '' said Kalganov sententiously . 
He too was drunk . 
`` Be quiet , boy ! 
If I call him a scoundrel , it does n't mean that I called all Poland so . 
One lajdak does n't make a Poland . 
Be quiet , my pretty boy , eat a sweetmeat . '' 
`` Ach , what fellows ! 
As though they were not men . 
Why wo n't they make friends ? '' 
said Grushenka , and went forward to dance . 
The chorus broke into `` Ah , my porch , my new porch ! '' 
Grushenka flung back her head , half opened her lips , smiled , waved her handkerchief , and suddenly , with a violent lurch , stood still in the middle of the room , looking bewildered . 
`` I 'm weak ... '' she said in an exhausted voice . 
`` Forgive me ... . 
I 'm weak , I ca n't ... . 
I 'm sorry . '' 
She bowed to the chorus , and then began bowing in all directions . 
`` I 'm sorry ... . 
Forgive me ... '' `` The lady 's been drinking . 
The pretty lady has been drinking , '' voices were heard saying . 
`` The lady 's drunk too much , '' Maximov explained to the girls , giggling . 
`` Mitya , lead me away ... take me , '' said Grushenka helplessly . 
Mitya pounced on her , snatched her up in his arms , and carried the precious burden through the curtains . 
`` Well , now I 'll go , '' thought Kalganov , and walking out of the blue room , he closed the two halves of the door after him . 
But the orgy in the larger room went on and grew louder and louder . 
