`` That 's just it . 
I have no proof . 
That cur Smerdyakov wo n't send you proofs from the other world ... in an envelope . 
You think of nothing but envelopes - one is enough . 
I 've no witnesses ... except one , perhaps , '' he smiled thoughtfully . 
`` Who is your witness ? '' 
`` He has a tail , your excellency , and that would be irregular ! 
Le diable n'existe point ! 
Do n't pay attention : he is a paltry , pitiful devil , '' he added suddenly . 
He ceased laughing and spoke as it were , confidentially . 
`` He is here somewhere , no doubt - under that table with the material evidence on it , perhaps . 
Where should he sit if not there ? 
You see , listen to me . 
I told him I do n't want to keep quiet , and he talked about the geological cataclysm ... idiocy ! 
Come , release the monster ... he 's been singing a hymn . 
That 's because his heart is light ! 
It 's like a drunken man in the street bawling how ` Vanka went to Petersburg , ' and I would give a quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy . 
You do n't know me ! 
Oh , how stupid all this business is ! 
Come , take me instead of him ! 
I did n't come for nothing ... . 
Why , why is everything so stupid ? 
... '' And he began slowly , and as it were reflectively , looking round him again . 
But the court was all excitement by now . 
Alyosha rushed towards him , but the court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
he cried , staring into the man 's face , and suddenly seizing him by the shoulders , he flung him violently to the floor . 
But the police were on the spot and he was seized . 
He screamed furiously . 
And all the time he was being removed , he yelled and screamed something incoherent . 
The whole court was thrown into confusion . 
I do n't remember everything as it happened . 
I was excited myself and could not follow . 
I only know that afterwards , when everything was quiet again and everyone understood what had happened , the court usher came in for a reprimand , though he very reasonably explained that the witness had been quite well , that the doctor had seen him an hour ago , when he had a slight attack of giddiness , but that , until he had come into the court , he had talked quite consecutively , so that nothing could have been foreseen - that he had , in fact , insisted on giving evidence . 
But before everyone had completely regained their composure and recovered from this scene , it was followed by another . 
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics . 
She sobbed , shrieking loudly , but refused to leave the court , struggled , and besought them not to remove her . 
Suddenly she cried to the President : `` There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once ! 
Here is a document , a letter ... take it , read it quickly , quickly ! 
It 's a letter from that monster ... that man there , there ! '' 
she pointed to Mitya . 
`` It was he killed his father , you will see that directly . 
He wrote to me how he would kill his father ! 
But the other one is ill , he is ill , he is delirious ! '' 
she kept crying out , beside herself . 
The court usher took the document she held out to the President , and she , dropping into her chair , hiding her face in her hands , began convulsively and noiselessly sobbing , shaking all over , and stifling every sound for fear she should be ejected from the court . 
The document she had handed up was that letter Mitya had written at the Metropolis tavern , which Ivan had spoken of as a `` mathematical proof . '' 
Alas ! 
its mathematical conclusiveness was recognised , and had it not been for that letter , Mitya might have escaped his doom or , at least , that doom would have been less terrible . 
It was , I repeat , difficult to notice every detail . 
What followed is still confused to my mind . 
The President must , I suppose , have at once passed on the document to the judges , the jury , and the lawyers on both sides . 
I only remember how they began examining the witness . 
On being gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently , Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously : `` I am ready , I am ready ! 
I am quite equal to answering you , '' she added , evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving evidence . 
She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and under what circumstances she received it . 
`` I received it the day before the crime was committed , but he wrote it the day before that , at the tavern - that is , two days before he committed the crime . 
Look , it is written on some sort of bill ! '' 
she cried breathlessly . 
`` He hated me at that time , because he had behaved contemptibly and was running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three thousand ... . 
Oh ! 
he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of his own meanness ! 
This is how it happened about that three thousand . 
I beg you , I beseech you , to hear me . 
Three weeks before he murdered his father , he came to me one morning . 
I knew he was in want of money , and what he wanted it for . 
Yes , yes - to win that creature and carry her off . 
I knew then that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me , and it was I , I , who gave him that money , who offered it to him on the pretext of his sending it to my sister in Moscow . 
And as I gave it him , I looked him in the face and said that he could send it when he liked , ` in a month 's time would do . ' 
How , how could he have failed to understand that I was practically telling him to his face , ` You want money to be false to me with your creature , so here 's the money for you . 
I give it to you myself . 
Take it , if you have so little honour as to take it ! ' 
I wanted to prove what he was , and what happened ? 
He took it , he took it , and squandered it with that creature in one night ... . 
But he knew , he knew that I knew all about it . 
I assure you he understood , too , that I gave him that money to test him , to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honour as to take it from me . 
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine , and he understood it all and he took it - he carried off my money ! 
`` That 's true , Katya , '' Mitya roared suddenly , `` I looked into your eyes and I knew that you were dishonouring me , and yet I took your money . 
Despise me as a scoundrel , despise me , all of you ! 
I 've deserved it ! '' 
`` Prisoner , '' cried the President , `` another word and I will order you to be removed . '' 
`` That money was a torment to him , '' Katya went on with impulsive haste . 
`` He wanted to repay it me . 
He wanted to , that 's true ; but he needed money for that creature , too . 
So he murdered his father , but he did n't repay me , and went off with her to that village where he was arrested . 
There , again , he squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father . 
And a day before the murder he wrote me this letter . 
He was drunk when he wrote it . 
I saw it at once , at the time . 
He wrote it from spite , and feeling certain , positively certain , that I should never show it to anyone , even if he did kill him , or else he would n't have written it . 
For he knew I should n't want to revenge myself and ruin him ! 
But read it , read it attentively - more attentively , please - and you will see that he had described it all in his letter , all beforehand , how he would kill his father and where his money was kept . 
Look , please , do n't overlook that , there 's one phrase there , ' I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone away . ' 
he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him , '' Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant triumph . 
Oh ! 
it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and detected every meaning underlining it . 
`` If he had n't been drunk , he would n't have written to me ; but , look , everything is written there beforehand , just as he committed the murder after . 
A complete programme of it ! '' 
she exclaimed frantically . 
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself , though , no doubt , she had foreseen them even a month ago , for even then , perhaps , shaking with anger , she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not . 
