` You were there , too , ' they said , ` you helped , you 're known all over the market ! ' 
And , for some reason , I really am known all over the market , '' Kolya added conceitedly . 
`` We all went off to the justice 's , they brought the goose , too . 
The fellow was crying in a great funk , simply blubbering like a woman . 
And the farmer kept shouting that you could kill any number of geese like that . 
Well , of course , there were witnesses . 
The justice of the peace settled it in a minute , that the farmer was to be paid a rouble for the goose , and the fellow to have the goose . 
And he was warned not to play such pranks again . 
And the fellow kept blubbering like a woman . 
` It was n't me , ' he said , ` it was he egged me on , ' and he pointed to me . 
I answered with the utmost composure that I had n't egged him on , that I simply stated the general proposition , had spoken hypothetically . 
The justice of the peace smiled and was vexed with himself once for having smiled . 
` I 'll complain to your masters of you , so that for the future you may n't waste your time on such general propositions , instead of sitting at your books and learning your lessons . ' 
He did n't complain to the masters , that was a joke , but the matter noised abroad and came to the ears of the masters . 
Their ears are long , you know ! 
The classical master , Kolbasnikov , was particularly shocked about it , but Dardanelov got me off again . 
But Kolbasnikov is savage with everyone now like a green ass . 
Did you know , Ilusha , he is just married , got a dowry of a thousand roubles , and his bride 's a regular fright of the first rank and the last degree . 
The third-class fellows wrote an epigram on it : Astounding news has reached the class , Kolbasnikov has been an ass . 
And so on , awfully funny , I 'll bring it to you later on . 
I say nothing against Dardanelov , he is a learned man , there 's no doubt about it . 
I respect men like that and it 's not because he stood up for me . '' 
`` But you took him down about the founders of Troy ! '' 
Smurov put in suddenly , proud of Krassotkin at such a moment . 
He was particularly pleased with the story of the goose . 
`` Did you really take him down ? '' 
the captain inquired , in a flattering way . 
`` On the question who founded Troy ? 
We heard of it , Ilusha told me about it at the time . '' 
`` He knows everything , father , he knows more than any of us ! '' 
put in Ilusha ; `` he only pretends to be like that , but really he is top in every subject ... '' Ilusha looked at Kolya with infinite happiness . 
`` Oh , that 's all nonsense about Troy , a trivial matter . 
I consider this an unimportant question , '' said Kolya with haughty humility . 
He had by now completely recovered his dignity , though he was still a little uneasy . 
He felt that he was greatly excited and that he had talked about the goose , for instance , with too little reserve , while Alyosha had looked serious and had not said a word all the time . 
And the vain boy began by degrees to have a rankling fear that Alyosha was silent because he despised him , and thought he was showing off before him . 
If he dared to think anything like that , Kolya would - `` I regard the question as quite a trivial one , '' he rapped out again , proudly . 
`` And I know who founded Troy , '' a boy , who had not spoken before , said suddenly , to the surprise of everyone . 
He was silent and seemed to be shy . 
He was a pretty boy of about eleven , called Kartashov . 
He was sitting near the door . 
Kolya looked at him with dignified amazement . 
The fact was that the identity of the founders of Troy had become a secret for the whole school , a secret which could only be discovered by reading Smaragdov , and no one had Smaragdov but Kolya . 
One day , when Kolya 's back was turned , Kartashov hastily opened Smaragdov , which lay among Kolya 's books , and immediately lighted on the passage relating to the foundation of Troy . 
This was a good time ago , but he felt uneasy and could not bring himself to announce publicly that he too knew who had founded Troy , afraid of what might happen and of Krassotkin 's somehow putting him to shame over it . 
But now he could n't resist saying it . 
For weeks he had been longing to . 
`` Well , who did found it ? '' 
Kolya , turning to him with haughty superciliousness . 
He saw from his face that he really did know and at once made up his mind how to take it . 
There was so to speak , a discordant note in the general harmony . 
`` Troy was founded by Teucer , Dardanus , Ilius and Tros , '' the boy rapped out at once , and in the same instant he blushed , blushed so , that it was painful to look at him . 
But the boys stared at him , stared at him for a whole minute , and then all the staring eyes turned at once and were fastened upon Kolya , who was still scanning the audacious boy with disdainful composure . 
`` In what sense did they found it ? '' 
he deigned to comment at last . 
`` And what is meant by founding a city or a state ? 
What do they do ? 
Did they go and each lay a brick , do you suppose ? '' 
There was laughter . 
The offending boy turned from pink to crimson . 
He was silent and on the point of tears . 
Kolya held him so for a minute . 
`` Before you talk of a historical event like the foundation of a nationality , you must first understand what you mean by it , '' he admonished him in stern , incisive tones . 
`` But I attach no consequence to these old wives ' tales and I do n't think much of universal history in general , '' he added carelessly , addressing the company generally . 
`` Universal history ? '' 
the captain inquired , looking almost scared . 
`` Yes , universal history ! 
It 's the study of the successive follies of mankind and nothing more . 
The only subjects I respect are mathematics and natural science , '' said Kolya . 
He was showing off and he stole a glance at Alyosha ; his was the only opinion he was afraid of there . 
But Alyosha was still silent and still serious as before . 
If Alyosha had said a word it would have stopped him , but Alyosha was silent and `` it might be the silence of contempt , '' and that finally irritated Kolya . 
`` The classical languages , too ... they are simply madness , nothing more . 
You seem to disagree with me again , Karamazov ? '' 
`` I do n't agree , '' said Alyosha , with a faint smile . 
`` The study of the classics , if you ask my opinion , is simply a police measure , that 's simply why it has been introduced into our schools . '' 
By degrees Kolya began to get breathless again . 
`` Latin and Greek were introduced because they are a bore and because they stupefy the intellect . 
It was dull before , so what could they do to make things duller ? 
It was senseless enough before , so what could they do to make it more senseless ? 
So they thought of Greek and Latin . 
That 's my opinion , I hope I shall never change it , '' Kolya finished abruptly . 
His cheeks were flushed . 
`` That 's true , '' assented Smurov suddenly , in a ringing tone of conviction . 
He had listened attentively . 
`` And yet he is first in Latin himself , '' cried one of the group of boys suddenly . 
`` Yes , father , he says that and yet he is first in Latin , '' echoed Ilusha . 
`` What of it ? '' 
Kolya thought fit to defend himself , though the praise was very sweet to him . 
`` I am fagging away at Latin because I have to , because I promised my mother to pass my examination , and I think that whatever you do , it 's worth doing it well . 
But in my soul I have a profound contempt for the classics and all that fraud ... . 
You do n't agree , Karamazov ? '' 
`` Why ` fraud ' ? '' 
Alyosha smiled again . 
`` Well , all the classical authors have been translated into all languages , so it was not for the sake of studying the classics they introduced Latin , but solely as a police measure , to stupefy the intelligence . 
So what can one call it but a fraud ? '' 
`` Why , who taught you all this ? '' 
cried Alyosha , surprised at last . 
`` In the first place I am capable of thinking for myself without being taught . 
Besides , what I said just now about the classics being translated our teacher Kolbasnikov has said to the whole of the third class . '' 
