But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity . 
You 've put yourself out to no purpose . ' 
`` I should have lost the game , of course . 
She 'd have run away . 
But it would have been an infernal revenge . 
It would have been worth it all . 
I 'd have howled with regret all the rest of my life , only to have played that trick . 
Would you believe it , it has never happened to me with any other woman , not one , to look at her at such a moment with hatred . 
But , on my oath , I looked at her for three seconds , or five perhaps , with fearful hatred - that hate which is only a hair 's - breadth from love , from the maddest love ! 
`` I went to the window , put my forehead against the frozen pane , and I remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire . 
I did not keep her long , do n't be afraid . 
I turned round , went up to the table , opened the drawer and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles -LRB- it was lying in a French dictionary -RRB- . 
Then I showed it her in silence , folded it , handed it to her , opened the door into the passage , and , stepping back , made her a deep bow . 
a most respectful , a most impressive bow , believe me ! 
She shuddered all over , gazed at me for a second , turned horribly pale-white as a sheet , in fact - and all at once , not impetuously but softly , gently , bowed down to my feet - not a boarding-school curtsey , but a Russian bow , with her forehead to the floor . 
She jumped up and ran away . 
I was wearing my sword . 
I drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot ; why , I do n't know . 
It would have been frightfully stupid , of course . 
I suppose it was from delight . 
Can you understand that one might kill oneself from delight ? 
But I did n't stab myself . 
I only kissed my sword and put it back in the scabbard - which there was no need to have told you , by the way . 
And I fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on rather thick to glorify myself . 
But let it pass , and to hell with all who pry into the human heart ! 
Well , so much for that ` adventure ' with Katerina Ivanovna . 
So now Ivan knows of it , and you - no one else . '' 
Dmitri got up , took a step or two in his excitement , pulled out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead , then sat down again , not in the same place as before , but on the opposite side , so that Alyosha had to turn quite round to face him . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - `` Heels Up '' `` NOW , '' said Alyosha , `` I understand the first half . '' 
`` You understand the first half . 
That half is a drama , and it was played out there . 
The second half is a tragedy , and it is being acted here . '' 
`` And I understand nothing of that second half so far , '' said Alyosha . 
`` And I ? 
Do you suppose I understand it ? '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri . 
There 's one important question . 
Tell me , you were betrothed , betrothed still ? '' 
`` We were n't betrothed at once , not for three months after that adventure . 
The next day I told myself that the incident was closed , concluded , that there would be no sequel . 
It seemed to me caddish to make her an offer . 
On her side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained in the town ; except , indeed , for one action . 
The day after her visit the maid-servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me . 
I tore it open ; it contained the change out of the banknote . 
Only four thousand five hundred roubles was needed , but there was a discount of about two hundred on changing it . 
She only sent me about two hundred and sixty . 
I do n't remember exactly , but not a note , not a word of explanation . 
I searched the packet for a pencil mark n-nothing ! 
Well , I spent the rest of the money on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me . 
`` Well , the lieutenant-colonel produced the battalion money , to the astonishment of everyone , for nobody believed that he had the money untouched . 
He 'd no sooner paid it than he fell ill , took to his bed , and , three weeks later , softening of the brain set in , and he died five days afterwards . 
He was buried with military honours , for he had not had time to receive his discharge . 
Ten days after his funeral , Katerina Ivanovna , with her aunt and sister , went to Moscow . 
And , behold , on the very day they went away -LRB- I had n't seen them , did n't see them off or take leave -RRB- I received a tiny note , a sheet of thin blue paper , and on it only one line in pencil : ' I will write to you . 
Wait . 
K. ' And that was all . 
`` I 'll explain the rest now , in two words . 
In Moscow their fortunes changed with the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabian fairy-tale . 
That general 's widow , their nearest relation , suddenly lost the two nieces who were her heiresses and next-of-kin - both died in the same week of small-pox . 
The old lady , prostrated with grief , welcomed Katya as a daughter , as her one hope , clutched at her , altered her will in Katya 's favour . 
But that concerned the future . 
Meanwhile she gave her , for present use , eighty thousand roubles , as a marriage portion , to do what she liked with . 
She was an hysterical woman . 
I saw something of her in Moscow , later . 
`` Well , suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles . 
I was speechless with surprise , as you may suppose . 
Three days later came the promised letter . 
I have it with me now . 
You must read it . 
She offers to be my wife , offers herself to me . ' 
I love you madly , she says , ` even if you do n't love me , never mind . 
Be my husband . 
Do n't be afraid . 
I wo n't hamper you in any way . 
I will be your chattel . 
I will be the carpet under your feet . 
I want to love you for ever . 
I want to save you from yourself . ' 
Alyosha , I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and in my vulgar tone , my everlastingly vulgar tone , that I can never cure myself of . 
That letter stabs me even now . 
Do you think I do n't mind - that I do n't mind still ? 
I wrote her an answer at once , as it was impossible for me to go to Moscow . 
I wrote to her with tears . 
One thing I shall be ashamed of for ever . 
I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only a stuck-up beggar ! 
I mentioned money ! 
I ought to have borne it in silence , but it slipped from my pen . 
Then I wrote at once to Ivan , and told him all I could about it in a letter of six pages , and sent him to her . 
Why do you look like that ? 
Why are you staring at me ? 
Yes , Ivan fell in love with her ; he 's in love with her still . 
I know that . 
I did a stupid thing , in the world 's opinion ; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the saving of us all now . 
Oo ! 
Do n't you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan , how she respects him ? 
When she compares us , do you suppose she can love a man like me , especially after all that has happened here ? '' 
`` But I 'm convinced that she does love a man like you , and not a man like him . '' 
`` She loves her own virtue , not me . '' 
The words broke involuntarily , and almost malignantly , from Dmitri . 
He laughed , but a minute later his eyes gleamed , he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist . 
