The word had almost escaped me , had almost broken from my lips ... you know how susceptible and aesthetically impressionable I am . 
But common sense - oh , a most unhappy trait in my character - kept me in due bounds and I let the moment pass ! 
For what would have happened , I reflected , what would have happened after my hosannah ? 
Everything on earth would have been extinguished at once and no events could have occurred . 
And so , solely from a sense of duty and my social position , was forced to suppress the good moment and to stick to my nasty task . 
Somebody takes all the credit of what 's good for Himself , and nothing but nastiness is left for me . 
But I do n't envy the honour of a life of idle imposture , I am not ambitious . 
Why am I , of all creatures in the world , doomed to be cursed by all decent people and even to be kicked , for if I put on mortal form I am bound to take such consequences sometimes ? 
I know , of course , there 's a secret in it , but they wo n't tell me the secret for anything , for then perhaps , seeing the meaning of it , I might bawl hosannah , and the indispensable minus would disappear at once , and good sense would reign supreme throughout the whole world . 
And that , of course , would mean the end of everything , even of magazines and newspapers , for who would take them in ? 
I know that at the end of all things I shall be reconciled . 
I , too , shall walk my quadrillion and learn the secret . 
But till that happens I am sulking and fulfil my destiny though it 's against the grain - that is , to ruin thousands for the sake of saving one . 
How many souls have had to be ruined and how many honourable reputations destroyed for the sake of that one righteous man , Job , over whom they made such a fool of me in old days ! 
Yes , till the secret is revealed , there are two sorts of truths for me - one , their truth , yonder , which I know nothing about so far , and the other my own . 
And there 's no knowing which will turn out the better ... . 
Are you asleep ? '' 
`` I might well be , '' Ivan groaned angrily . 
`` All my stupid ideas - outgrown , thrashed out long ago , and flung aside like a dead carcass you present to me as something new ! '' 
`` There 's no pleasing you ! 
And I thought I should fascinate you by my literary style . 
That hosannah in the skies really was n't bad , was it ? 
And then that ironical tone a la Heine , eh ? '' 
`` No , I was never such a flunkey ! 
How then could my soul beget a flunkey like you ? '' 
`` My dear fellow , I know a most charming and attractive young Russian gentleman , a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art , the author of a promising poem entitled The Grand Inquisitor . 
I was only thinking of him ! '' 
`` I forbid you to speak of The Grand Inquisitor , '' cried Ivan , crimson with shame . 
`` And the Geological Cataclysm . 
Do you remember ? 
That was a poem , now ! '' 
`` Hold your tongue , or I 'll kill you ! '' 
`` You 'll kill me ? 
No , excuse me , I will speak . 
I came to treat myself to that pleasure . 
Oh , I love the dreams of my ardent young friends , quivering with eagerness for life ! 
` There are new men , ' you decided last spring , when you were meaning to come here , ` they propose to destroy everything and begin with cannibalism . 
Stupid fellows ! 
they did n't ask my advice ! 
I maintain that nothing need be destroyed , that we only need to destroy the idea of God in man , that 's how we have to set to work . 
It 's that , that we must begin with . 
Oh , blind race of men who have no understanding ! 
As soon as men have all of them denied God - and I believe that period , analogous with geological periods , will come to pass - the old conception of the universe will fall of itself without cannibalism , and , what 's more , the old morality , and everything will begin anew . 
Men will unite to take from life all it can give , but only for joy and happiness in the present world . 
Man will be lifted up with a spirit of divine Titanic pride and the man-god will appear . 
From hour to hour extending his conquest of nature infinitely by his will and his science , man will feel such lofty joy from hour to hour in doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams of the joys of heaven . 
Everyone will know that he is mortal and will accept death proudly and serenely like a god . 
His pride will teach him that it 's useless for him to repine at life 's being a moment , and he will love his brother without need of reward . 
Love will be sufficient only for a moment of life , but the very consciousness of its momentariness will intensify its fire , which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love beyond the grave ' ... and so on and so on in the same style . 
Charming ! '' 
Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor , and his hands pressed to his ears , but he began trembling all over . 
The voice continued . 
`` The question now is , my young thinker reflected , is it possible that such a period will ever come ? 
If it does , everything is determined and humanity is settled for ever . 
But as , owing to man 's inveterate stupidity , this can not come about for at least a thousand years , everyone who recognises the truth even now may legitimately order his life as he pleases , on the new principles . 
In that sense , ` all things are lawful ' for him . 
What 's more , even if this period never comes to pass , since there is anyway no God and no immortality , the new man may well become the man-god , even if he is the only one in the whole world , and promoted to his new position , he may lightheartedly overstep all the barriers of the old morality of the old slaveman , if necessary . 
There is no law for God . 
Where God stands , the place is holy . 
Where I stand will be at once the foremost place ... ` all things are lawful ' and that 's the end of it ! 
That 's all very charming ; but if you want to swindle why do you want a moral sanction for doing it ? 
But that 's our modern Russian all over . 
He ca n't bring himself to swindle without a moral sanction . 
He is so in love with truth - '' The visitor talked , obviously carried away by his own eloquence , speaking louder and louder and looking ironically at his host . 
But he did not succeed in finishing ; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the table and flung it at the orator . 
`` Ah , mais c'est bete enfin , '' * cried the latter , jumping up from the sofa and shaking the drops of tea off himself . 
`` He remembers Luther 's inkstand ! 
He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream ! 
It 's like a woman ! 
I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your ears . '' 
* But after all , that 's stupid . 
A loud , persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window . 
Ivan jumped up from the sofa . 
`` Do you hear ? 
You 'd better open , '' cried the visitor ; `` it 's your brother Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news , I 'll be bound ! '' 
`` Be silent , deceiver , I knew it was Alyosha , I felt he was coming , and of course he has not come for nothing ; of course he brings ` news , ' '' Ivan exclaimed frantically . 
`` Open , open to him . 
There 's a snowstorm and he is your brother . 
Monsieur sait-il le temps qu'il fait ? 
C'est a ne pas mettre un chien dehors . '' 
* * Does the gentleman know the weather he 's making ? 
It 's not weather for a dog . 
The knocking continued . 
Ivan wanted to rush to the window , but something seemed to fetter his arms and legs . 
He strained every effort to break his chains , but in vain . 
The knocking at the window grew louder and louder . 
At last the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up from the sofa . 
He looked round him wildly . 
Both candles had almost burnt out , the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood before him on the table , and there was no one on the sofa opposite . 
The knocking on the window frame went on persistently , but it was by no means so loud as it had seemed in his dream ; on the contrary , it was quite subdued . 
`` It was not a dream ! 
No , I swear it was not a dream , it all happened just now ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
He rushed to the window and opened the movable pane . 
`` Alyosha , I told you not to come , '' he cried fiercely to his brother . 
`` In two words , what do you want ? 
In two words , do you hear ? '' 
`` An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself , '' Alyosha answered from the yard . 
`` Come round to the steps , I 'll open at once , '' said Ivan , going to open the door to Alyosha . 
`` It Was He Who Said That '' ALYOSHA coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken his own life . 
