And the third time I knew I 'd broken his skull . 
He suddenly rolled on his back , face upwards , covered with blood . 
I looked round . 
There was no blood on me , not a spot . 
I wiped the paper-weight , put it back , went up to the ikons , took the money out of the envelope , and flung the envelope on the floor and the pink ribbon beside it . 
I went out into the garden all of a tremble , straight to the apple-tree with a hollow in it - you know that hollow . 
I 'd marked it long before and put a rag and a piece of paper ready in it . 
I wrapped all the notes in the rag and stuffed it deep down in the hole . 
And there it stayed for over a fortnight . 
I took it out later , when I came out of the hospital . 
I went back to my bed , lay down and thought , ` If Grigory Vassilyevitch has been killed outright it may be a bad job for me , but if he is not killed and recovers , it will be first-rate , for then he 'll bear witness that Dmitri Fyodorovitch has been here , and so he must have killed him and taken the money . ' 
Then I began groaning with suspense and impatience , so as to wake Marfa Ignatyevna as soon as possible . 
At last she got up and she rushed to me , but when she saw Grigory Vassilyevitch was not there , she ran out , and I heard her scream in the garden . 
And that set it all going and set my mind at rest . '' 
He stopped . 
Ivan had listened all the time in dead silence without stirring or taking his eyes off him . 
As he told his story Smerdyakov glanced at him from time to time , but for the most part kept his eyes averted . 
When he had finished he was evidently agitated and was breathing hard . 
The perspiration stood out on his face . 
But it was impossible to tell whether it was remorse he was feeling , or what . 
`` Stay , '' cried Ivan pondering . 
`` What about the door ? 
If he only opened the door to you , how could Grigory have seen it open before ? 
For Grigory saw it before you went . '' 
It was remarkable that Ivan spoke quite amicably , in a different tone , not angry as before , so if anyone had opened the door at that moment and peeped in at them , he would certainly have concluded that they were talking peaceably about some ordinary , though interesting , subject . 
`` As for that door and having seen it open , that 's only his fancy , '' said Smerdyakov , with a wry smile . 
`` He is not a man , I assure you , but an obstinate mule . 
He did n't see it , but fancied he had seen it , and there 's no shaking him . 
It 's just our luck he took that notion into his head , for they ca n't fail to convict Dmitri Fyodorovitch after that . '' 
`` Listen ... '' said Ivan , beginning to seem bewildered again and making an effort to grasp something . 
`` Listen . 
There are a lot of questions I want to ask you , but I forget them ... I keep forgetting and getting mixed up . 
Yes . 
Tell me this at least , why did you open the envelope and leave it there on the floor ? 
Why did n't you simply carry off the envelope ? 
... When you were telling me , I thought you spoke about it as though it were the right thing to do ... but why , I ca n't understand ... '' `` I did that for a good reason . 
For if a man had known all about it , as I did for instance , if he 'd seen those notes before , and perhaps had put them in that envelope himself , and had seen the envelope sealed up and addressed , with his own eyes , if such a man had done the murder , what should have made him tear open the envelope afterwards , especially in such desperate haste , since he 'd know for certain the notes must be in the envelope ? 
No , if the robber had been someone like me , he 'd simply have put the envelope straight in his pocket and got away with it as fast as he could . 
But it 'd be quite different with Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
He only knew about the envelope by hearsay ; he had never seen it , and if he 'd found it , for instance , under the mattress , he 'd have torn it open as quickly as possible to make sure the notes were in it . 
And he 'd have thrown the envelope down , without having time to think that it would be evidence against him . 
Because he was not an habitual thief and had never directly stolen anything before , for he is a gentleman born , and if he did bring himself to steal , it would not be regular stealing , but simply taking what was his own , for he 'd told the whole town he meant to before , and had even bragged aloud before everyone that he 'd go and take his property from Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I did n't say that openly to the prosecutor when I was being examined , but quite the contrary , I brought him to it by a hint , as though I did n't see it myself , and as though he 'd thought of it himself and I had n't prompted him ; so that Mr. Prosecutor 's mouth positively watered at my suggestion . '' 
`` But can you possibly have thought of all that on the spot ? '' 
cried Ivan , overcome with astonishment . 
He looked at Smerdyakov again with alarm . 
`` Mercy on us ! 
Could anyone think of it all in such a desperate hurry ? 
It was all thought out beforehand . '' 
`` Well ... well , it was the devil helped you ! '' 
Ivan cried again . 
`` No , you are not a fool , you are far cleverer than I thought ... '' He got up , obviously intending to walk across the room . 
He was in terrible distress . 
But as the table blocked his way , and there was hardly room to pass between the table and the wall , he only turned round where he stood and sat down again . 
Perhaps the impossibility of moving irritated him , as he suddenly cried out almost as furiously as before . 
`` Listen , you miserable , contemptible creature ! 
Do n't you understand that if I have n't killed you , it 's simply because I am keeping you to answer to-morrow at the trial . 
God sees , '' Ivan raised his hand , `` perhaps I , too , was guilty ; perhaps I really had a secret desire for my father 's ... death , but I swear I was not as guilty as you think , and perhaps I did n't urge you on at all . 
No , no , I did n't urge you on ! 
But no matter , I will give evidence against myself to-morrow at the trial . 
I 'm determined to ! 
I shall tell everything , everything . 
But we 'll make our appearance together . 
And whatever you may say against me at the trial , whatever evidence you give , I 'll face it ; I am not afraid of you . 
I 'll confirm it all myself ! 
But you must confess , too ! 
You must , you must ; we 'll go together . 
That 's how it shall be ! '' 
Ivan said this solemnly and resolutely and from his flashing eyes alone it could be seen that it would be so . 
`` You are ill , I see ; you are quite ill . 
Your eyes are yellow , '' Smerdyakov commented , without the least irony , with apparent sympathy in fact . 
`` We 'll go together , '' Ivan repeated . 
`` And if you wo n't go , no matter , I 'll go alone . '' 
Smerdyakov paused as though pondering . 
`` There 'll be nothing of the sort , and you wo n't go , '' he concluded at last positively . 
`` You do n't understand me , '' Ivan exclaimed reproachfully . 
`` You 'll be too much ashamed , if you confess it all . 
And , what 's more , it will be no use at all , for I shall say straight out that I never said anything of the sort to you , and that you are either ill -LRB- and it looks like it , too -RRB- , or that you 're so sorry for your brother that you are sacrificing yourself to save him and have invented it all against me , for you 've always thought no more of me than if I 'd been a fly . 
And who will believe you , and what single proof have you got ? '' 
`` Listen , you showed me those notes just now to convince me . '' 
Smerdyakov lifted the book off the notes and laid it on one side . 
`` Take that money away with you , '' Smerdyakov sighed . 
`` Of course , I shall take it . 
But why do you give it to me , if you committed the murder for the sake of it ? '' 
Ivan looked at him with great surprise . 
`` I do n't want it , '' Smerdyakov articulated in a shaking voice , with a gesture of refusal . 
`` I did have an idea of beginning a new life with that money in Moscow or , better still , abroad . 
I did dream of it , chiefly because ` all things are lawful . ' 
That was quite right what you taught me , for you talked a lot to me about that . 
For if there 's no everlasting God , there 's no such thing as virtue , and there 's no need of it . 
You were right there . 
So that 's how I looked at it . '' 
`` Did you come to that of yourself ? '' 
asked Ivan , with a wry smile . 
`` With your guidance . '' 
`` And now , I suppose , you believe in God , since you are giving back the money ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe , '' whispered Smerdyakov . 
`` Then why are you giving it back ? '' 
`` Leave off ... that 's enough ! '' 
Smerdyakov waved his hand again . 
