There was a note of defiance in her voice . 
It was then Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
`` Did that take place not here , but at the beginning of your acquaintance ? '' 
Fetyukovitch suggested cautiously , feeling his way , instantly scenting something favourable . 
I must mention in parenthesis that , though Fetyukovitch had been brought from Petersburg partly at the instance of Katerina Ivanovna herself , he knew nothing about the episode of the four thousand roubles given her by Mitya , and of her `` bowing to the ground to him . '' 
She concealed this from him and said nothing about it , and that was strange . 
It may be pretty certainly assumed that she herself did not know till the very last minute whether she would speak of that episode in the court , and waited for the inspiration of the moment . 
No , I can never forget those moments . 
She began telling her story . 
She told everything , the whole episode that Mitya had told Alyosha , and her bowing to the ground , and her reason . 
She told about her father and her going to Mitya , and did not in one word , in a single hint , suggest that Mitya had himself , through her sister , proposed they should `` send him Katerina Ivanovna '' to fetch the money . 
She generously concealed that and was not ashamed to make it appear as though she had of her own impulse run to the young officer , relying on something ... to beg him for the money . 
It was something tremendous ! 
I turned cold and trembled as I listened . 
The court was hushed , trying to catch each word . 
It was something unexampled . 
Even from such a self-willed and contemptuously proud girl as she was , such an extremely frank avowal , such sacrifice , such self-immolation , seemed incredible . 
And for what , for whom ? 
To save the man who had deceived and insulted her and to help , in however small a degree , in saving him , by creating a strong impression in his favour . 
And , indeed , the figure of the young officer who , with a respectful bow to the innocent girl , handed her his last four thousand roubles - all he had in the world - was thrown into a very sympathetic and attractive light , but ... I had a painful misgiving at heart ! 
I felt that calumny might come of it later -LRB- and it did , in fact , it did -RRB- . 
It was repeated all over the town afterwards with spiteful laughter that was perhaps not quite complete - that is , in the statement that the officer had let the young lady depart `` with nothing but a respectful bow . '' 
It was hinted that something was here omitted . 
`` And even if nothing had been omitted , if this were the whole story , '' the most highly respected of our ladies maintained , `` even then it 's very doubtful whether it was creditable for a young girl to behave in that way , even for the sake of saving her father . '' 
And can Katerina Ivanovna , with her intelligence , her morbid sensitiveness , have failed to understand that people would talk like that ? 
She must have understood it , yet she made up her mind to tell everything . 
Of course , all these nasty little suspicions as to the truth of her story only arose afterwards and at the first moment all were deeply impressed by it . 
As for the judges and the lawyers , they listened in reverent , almost shamefaced silence to Katerina Ivanovna . 
The prosecutor did not venture upon even one question on the subject . 
Fetyukovitch made a low bow to her . 
Oh , he was almost triumphant ! 
Much ground had been gained . 
For a man to give his last four thousand on a generous impulse and then for the same man to murder his father for the sake of robbing him of three thousand - the idea seemed too incongruous . 
Fetyukovitch felt that now the charge of theft , at least , was as good as disproved . 
`` The case '' was thrown into quite a different light . 
There was a wave of sympathy for Mitya . 
As for him ... . 
I was told that once or twice , while Katerina Ivanovna was giving her evidence , he jumped up from his seat , sank back again , and hid his face in his hands . 
But when she had finished , he suddenly cried in a sobbing voice : `` Katya , why have you ruined me ? '' 
and his sobs were audible all over the court . 
But he instantly restrained himself , and cried again : `` Now I am condemned ! '' 
Then he sat rigid in his place , with his teeth clenched and his arms across his chest . 
Katerina Ivanovna remained in the court and sat down in her place . 
She was pale and sat with her eyes cast down . 
Those who were sitting near her declared that for a long time she shivered all over as though in a fever . 
Grushenka was called . 
I am approaching the sudden catastrophe which was perhaps the final cause of Mitya 's ruin . 
For I am convinced , so is everyone - all the lawyers said the same afterwards - that if the episode had not occurred , the prisoner would at least have been recommended to mercy . 
But of that later . 
A few words first about Grushenka . 
She , too , was dressed entirely in black , with her magnificent black shawl on her shoulders . 
She walked to the witness-box with her smooth , noiseless tread , with the slightly swaying gait common in women of full figure . 
She looked steadily at the President , turning her eyes neither to the right nor to the left . 
To my thinking she looked very handsome at that moment , and not at all pale , as the ladies alleged afterwards . 
They declared , too , that she had a concentrated and spiteful expression . 
I believe that she was simply irritated and painfully conscious of the contemptuous and inquisitive eyes of our scandal-loving public . 
She was proud and could not stand contempt . 
She was one of those people who flare up , angry and eager to retaliate , at the mere suggestion of contempt . 
There was an element of timidity , too , of course , and inward shame at her own timidity , so it was not strange that her tone kept changing . 
At one moment it was angry , contemptuous and rough , and at another there was a sincere note of self-condemnation . 
Sometimes she spoke as though she were taking a desperate plunge ; as though she felt , `` I do n't care what happens , I 'll say it ... '' Apropos of her acquaintance with Fyodor Pavlovitch , she remarked curtly , `` That 's all nonsense , and was it my fault that he would pester me ? '' 
But a minute later she added , `` It was all my fault . 
I was laughing at them both - at the old man and at him , too - and I brought both of them to this . 
It was all on account of me it happened . '' 
Samsonov 's name came up somehow . 
`` That 's nobody 's business , '' she snapped at once , with a sort of insolent defiance . 
`` He was my benefactor ; he took me when I had n't a shoe to my foot , when my family had turned me out . '' 
The President reminded her , though very politely , that she must answer the questions directly , without going off into irrelevant details . 
Grushenka crimsoned and her eyes flashed . 
The envelope with the notes in it she had not seen , but had only heard from `` that wicked wretch '' that Fyodor Pavlovitch had an envelope with notes for three thousand in it . 
`` But that was all foolishness . 
I was only laughing . 
I would n't have gone to him for anything . '' 
`` To whom are you referring as ` that wicked wretch ' ? '' 
inquired the prosecutor . 
`` The lackey , Smerdyakov , who murdered his master and hanged himself last night . '' 
She was , of course , at once asked what ground she had for such a definite accusation ; but it appeared that she , too , had no grounds for it . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch told me so himself ; you can believe him . 
The woman who came between us has ruined him ; she is the cause of it all , let me tell you , '' Grushenka added . 
She seemed to be quivering with hatred , and there was a vindictive note in her voice . 
She was again asked to whom she was referring . 
`` The young lady , Katerina Ivanovna there . 
She sent for me , offered me chocolate , tried to fascinate me . 
There 's not much true shame about her , I can tell you that ... '' At this point the President checked her sternly , begging her to moderate her language . 
But the jealous woman 's heart was burning , and she did not care what she did . 
`` When the prisoner was arrested at Mokroe , '' the prosecutor asked , `` everyone saw and heard you run out of the next room and cry out : ` It 's all my fault . 
We 'll go to Siberia together ! ' 
So you already believed him to have murdered his father ? '' 
`` I do n't remember what I felt at the time , '' answered Grushenka . 
`` Everyone was crying out that he had killed his father , and I felt that it was my fault , that it was on my account he had murdered him . 
But when he said he was n't guilty , I believed him at once , and I believe him now and always shall believe him . 
He is not the man to tell a lie . '' 
Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination . 
I remember that among other things he asked about Rakitin and the twenty-five roubles `` you paid him for bringing Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov to see you . '' 
`` There was nothing strange about his taking the money , '' sneered Grushenka , with angry contempt . 
`` He was always coming to me for money : he used to get thirty roubles a month at least out of me , chiefly for luxuries : he had enough to keep him without my help . '' 
`` What led you to be so liberal to Mr. Rakitin ? '' 
Fetyukovitch asked , in spite of an uneasy movement on the part of the President . 
`` Why , he is my cousin . 
His mother was my mother 's sister . 
