Miusov observed aloud , while Maximov ran back to the monastery . 
`` He 's like von Sohn , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly . 
`` Is that all you can think of ? 
... In what way is he like von Sohn ? 
Have you ever seen von Sohn ? '' 
`` I 've seen his portrait . 
It 's not the features , but something indefinable . 
He 's a second von Sohn . 
I can always tell from the physiognomy . '' 
`` Ah , I dare say you are a connoisseur in that . 
But , look here , Fyodor Pavlovitch , you said just now that we had given our word to behave properly . 
Remember it . 
I advise you to control yourself . 
But , if you begin to play the fool I do n't intend to be associated with you here ... You see what a man he is '' - he turned to the monk - `` I 'm afraid to go among decent people with him . '' 
A fine smile , not without a certain slyness , came on to the pale , bloodless lips of the monk , but he made no reply , and was evidently silent from a sense of his own dignity . 
Miusov frowned more than ever . 
`` Oh , devil take them all ! 
An outer show elaborated through centuries , and nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath , '' flashed through Miusov 's mind . 
`` Here 's the hermitage . 
We 've arrived , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` The gates are shut . '' 
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted above and on the sides of the gates . 
`` When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do . 
Here in this hermitage there are twenty-five saints being saved . 
They look at one another , and eat cabbages . 
And not one woman goes in at this gate . 
That 's what is remarkable . 
And that really is so . 
But I did hear that the elder receives ladies , '' he remarked suddenly to the monk . 
`` Women of the people are here too now , lying in the portico there waiting . 
But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining the portico , but outside the precincts you can see the windows - and the elder goes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough . 
They are always outside the precincts . 
There is a Harkov lady , Madame Hohlakov , waiting there now with her sick daughter . 
Probably he has promised to come out to her , though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown himself even to the people . '' 
`` So then there are loopholes , after all , to creep out of the hermitage to the ladies . 
Do n't suppose , holy father , that I mean any harm . 
But do you know that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed , but no creature of the female sex - no hens , nor turkey hens , nor cows . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , I warn you I shall go back and leave you here . 
They 'll turn you out when I 'm gone . '' 
`` But I 'm not interfering with you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
Look , '' he cried suddenly , stepping within the precincts , `` what a vale of roses they live in ! '' 
Though there were no roses now , there were numbers of rare and beautiful autumn flowers growing wherever there was space for them , and evidently tended by a skilful hand ; there were flower-beds round the church , and between the tombs ; and the one-storied wooden house where the elder lived was also surrounded with flowers . 
`` And was it like this in the time of the last elder , Varsonofy ? 
He did n't care for such elegance . 
They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladies with a stick , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , as he went up the steps . 
`` The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange , but a great deal that 's told is foolishness . 
He never thrashed anyone , '' answered the monk . 
`` Now , gentlemen , if you will wait a minute I will announce you . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , for the last time , your compact , do you hear ? 
Behave properly or I will pay you out ! '' 
Miusov had time to mutter again . 
`` I ca n't think why you are so agitated , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch observed sarcastically . 
`` Are you uneasy about your sins ? 
They say he can tell by one 's eyes what one has come about . 
And what a lot you think of their opinion ! 
you , a Parisian , and so advanced . 
I 'm surprised at you . '' 
But Miusov had no time to reply to this sarcasm . 
They were asked to come in . 
He walked in , somewhat irritated . 
`` Now , I know myself , I am annoyed , I shall lose my temper and begin to quarrel - and lower myself and my ideas , '' he reflected . 
The Old Buffoon THEY entered the room almost at the same moment that the elder came in from his bedroom . 
There were already in the cell , awaiting the elder , two monks of the hermitage , one the Father Librarian , and the other Father Paissy , a very learned man , so they said , in delicate health , though not old . 
There was also a tall young man , who looked about two and twenty , standing in the corner throughout the interview . 
He had a broad , fresh face , and clever , observant , narrow brown eyes , and was wearing ordinary dress . 
He was a divinity student , living under the protection of the monastery . 
His expression was one of unquestioning , but self-respecting , reverence . 
Being in a subordinate and dependent position , and so not on an equality with the guests , he did not greet them with a bow . 
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice , and by Alyosha . 
The two monks rose and greeted him with a very deep bow , touching the ground with their fingers ; then kissed his hand . 
Blessing them , the elder replied with as deep a reverence to them , and asked their blessing . 
The whole ceremony was performed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling , not like an everyday rite . 
But Miusov fancied that it was all done with intentional impressiveness . 
He stood in front of the other visitors . 
He ought - he had reflected upon it the evening before - from simple politeness , since it was the custom here , to have gone up to receive the elder 's blessing , even if he did not kiss his hand . 
But when he saw all this bowing and kissing on the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind . 
With dignified gravity he made a rather deep , conventional bow , and moved away to a chair . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same , mimicking Miusov like an ape . 
Ivan bowed with great dignity and courtesy , but he too kept his hands at his sides , while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all . 
The elder let fall the hand raised to bless them , and bowing to them again , asked them all to sit down . 
The blood rushed to Alyosha 's cheeks . 
He was ashamed . 
His forebodings were coming true . 
Father Zossima sat down on a very old-fashioned mahogany sofa , covered with leather , and made his visitors sit down in a row along the opposite wall on four mahogany chairs , covered with shabby black leather . 
The monks sat , one at the door and the other at the window . 
The divinity student , the novice , and Alyosha remained standing . 
The cell was not very large and had a faded look . 
It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture , of coarse and poor quality . 
There were two pots of flowers in the window , and a number of holy pictures in the corner . 
Before one huge ancient ikon of the virgin a lamp was burning . 
Near it were two other holy pictures in shining settings , and , next them , carved cherubim , china eggs , a Catholic cross of ivory , with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it , and several foreign engravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries . 
Next to these costly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian prints of saints and martyrs , such as are sold for a few farthings at all the fairs . 
On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops , past and present . 
Miusov took a cursory glance at all these `` conventional '' surroundings and bent an intent look upon the elder . 
He had a high opinion of his own insight a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty , an age at which a clever man of the world of established position can hardly help taking himself rather seriously . 
At the first moment he did not like Zossima . 
There was , indeed , something in the elder 's face which many people besides Miusov might not have liked . 
He was a short , bent , little man , with very weak legs , and though he was only sixty-five , he looked at least ten years older . 
His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles , particularly numerous about his eyes , which were small , light-coloured , quick , and shining like two bright points . 
He had a sprinkling of grey hair about his temples . 
