Three days later , on the evening you came , he brought me a sealed envelope , which I was to open at once , if anything happened to him . 
Oh , he foresaw his illness ! 
He told me that the envelope contained the details of the escape , and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill , I was to save Mitya alone . 
Then he left me money , nearly ten thousand - those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his speech , having learnt from someone that he had sent them to be changed . 
I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother , and was confiding this plan of escape to me , though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya . 
Oh , that was a sacrifice ! 
No , you can not understand the greatness of such self-sacrifice , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I wanted to fall at his feet in reverence , but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joy at the thought of Mitya 's being saved -LRB- and he certainly would have imagined that ! -RRB- 
, and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again , and instead of kissing his feet , flew into a fury again ! 
Oh , I am unhappy ! 
It 's my character , my awful , unhappy character ! 
Oh , you will see , I shall end by driving him , too , to abandon me for another with whom he can get on better , like Dmitri . 
But ... no , I could not bear it , I should kill myself . 
And when you came in then , and when I called to you and told him to come back , I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me that do you remember ? 
- I cried out to you that it was he , he alone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer ! 
I said that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again . 
He had never , never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer . 
On the contrary , it was I who persuaded him ! 
Oh , my vile temper was the cause of everything ! 
I paved the way to that hideous scene at the trial . 
He wanted to show me that he was an honourable man , and that , even if I loved his brother , he would not ruin him for revenge or jealousy . 
So he came to the court ... I am the cause of it all , I alone am to blame ! '' 
Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before , and he felt that she was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief . 
Oh , Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery , though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial ; but it would have been , for some reason , too painful to him if she had been brought so low as to speak to him now about that . 
She was suffering for her `` treachery '' at the trial , and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to confess it to him , to him , Alyosha , with tears and cries and hysterical writhings on the floor . 
But he dreaded that moment and longed to spare her . 
It made the commission on which he had come even more difficult . 
He spoke of Mitya again . 
`` It 's all right , it 's all right , do n't be anxious about him ! 
she began again , sharply and stubbornly . 
`` All that is only momentary , I know him , I know his heart only too well . 
You may be sure he will consent to escape . 
It 's not as though it would be immediately ; he will have time to make up his mind to it . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and will manage it all himself , so that I shall have nothing to do with it . 
Do n't be anxious ; he will consent to run away . 
He has agreed already : do you suppose he would give up that creature ? 
And they wo n't let her go to him , so he is bound to escape . 
It 's you he 's most afraid of , he is afraid you wo n't approve of his escape on moral grounds . 
But you must generously allow it , if your sanction is so necessary , '' Katya added viciously . 
She paused and smiled . 
`` He talks about some hymn , '' she went on again , `` some cross he has to bear , some duty ; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it , and if you knew how he talked ! 
Katya cried suddenly , with feeling she could not repress , `` If you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment he told me , and how he hated him , perhaps , at the same moment . 
And I heard his story and his tears with sneering disdain . 
Brute ! 
Yes , I am a brute . 
I am responsible for his fever . 
But that man in prison is incapable of suffering , '' Katya concluded irritably . 
`` Can such a man suffer ? 
Men like him never suffer ! '' 
There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words . 
And yet it was she who had betrayed him . 
`` Perhaps because she feels how she 's wronged him she hates him at moments , '' Alyosha thought to himself . 
He hoped that it was only `` at moments . '' 
In Katya 's last words he detected a challenging note , but he did not take it up . 
`` I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself . 
Or do you , too , consider that to escape would be dishonourable , cowardly , or something ... unchristian , perhaps ? '' 
Katya added , even more defiantly . 
`` Oh , no . 
I 'll tell him everything , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` He asks you to come and see him to-day , '' he blurted out suddenly , looking her steadily in the face . 
She started , and drew back a little from him on the sofa . 
`` Me ? 
Can that be ? '' 
She faltered , turning pale . 
`` It can and ought to be ! '' 
Alyosha began emphatically , growing more animated . 
`` He needs you particularly just now . 
I would not have opened the subject and worried you , if it were not necessary . 
He is ill , he is beside himself , he keeps asking for you . 
It is not to be reconciled with you that he wants you , but only that you would go and show yourself at his door . 
So much has happened to him since that day . 
He realises that he has injured you beyond all reckoning . 
He does not ask your forgiveness - ` It 's impossible to forgive me , ' he says himself - but only that you would show yourself in his doorway . '' 
`` It 's so sudden ... '' faltered Katya . 
`` I 've had a presentiment all these days that you would come with that message . 
I knew he would ask me to come . 
It 's impossible ! '' 
`` Let it be impossible , but do it . 
Only think , he realises for the first time how he has wounded you , the first time in his life ; he had never grasped it before so fully . 
He said , ` If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy all my life . ' 
you hear ? 
though he is condemned to penal servitude for twenty years , he is still planning to be happy - is not that piteous ? 
Think - you must visit him ; though he is ruined , he is innocent , '' broke like a challenge from Alyosha . 
`` His hands are clean , there is no blood on them ! 
For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now . 
Go , greet him on his way into the darkness - stand at his door , that is all ... . 
You ought to do it , you ought to ! '' 
Alyosha concluded , laying immense stress on the word `` ought . '' 
`` I ought to ... but I can not ... '' Katya moaned . 
`` He will look at me ... . 
I ca n't . '' 
`` Your eyes ought to meet . 
How will you live all your life , if you do n't make up your mind to do it now ? '' 
`` Better suffer all my life . '' 
`` You ought to go , you ought to go , '' Alyosha repeated with merciless emphasis . 
`` But why to-day , why at once ? 
... I ca n't leave our patient - '' `` You can for a moment . 
It will only be a moment . 
If you do n't come , he will be in delirium by to-night . 
I would not tell you a lie ; have pity on him ! '' 
