Such heavy burdens are not for all men . 
For some they are impossible . 
These are my thoughts about it , if you want them so much . 
If other men would have to answer for your escape , officers or soldiers , then I would not have ` allowed ' you , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But they declare - the superintendent of that etape * told Ivan himself - that if it 's well managed there will be no great inquiry , and that they can get off easily . 
Of course , bribing is dishonest even in such a case , but I ca n't undertake to judge about it , because if Ivan and Katya commissioned me to act for you , I know I should go and give bribes . 
I must tell you the truth . 
And so I ca n't judge of your own action . 
But let me assure you that I shall never condemn you . 
And it would be a strange thing if I could judge you in this . 
Now I think I 've gone into everything . '' 
* Stockade . 
`` But I do condemn myself ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I shall escape , that was settled apart from you ; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away ? 
But I shall condemn myself , and I will pray for my sin for ever . 
That 's how the Jesuits talk , is n't it ? 
Just as we are doing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything , '' cried Mitya , with a joyful laugh . 
`` So I 've caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical . 
I must kiss you for that . 
Now listen to the rest ; I 'll open the other side of my heart to you . 
This is what I planned and decided . 
If I run away , even with money and a passport , and even to America , I should be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure , not for happiness , but to another exile as bad , perhaps , as Siberia . 
It is as bad , Alyosha , it is ! 
I hate that America , damn it , already . 
Even though Grusha will be with me . 
Just look at her ; is she an American ? 
She is Russian , Russian to the marrow of her bones ; she will be homesick for the mother country , and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my sake , that she has taken up that cross for me . 
And what harm has she done ? 
And how shall I , too , put up with the rabble out there , though they may be better than I , every one of them ? 
I hate that America already ! 
And though they may be wonderful at machinery , every one of them , damn them , they are not of my soul . 
I love Russia , Alyosha , I love the Russian God , though I am a scoundrel myself . 
I shall choke there ! '' 
he exclaimed , his eyes suddenly flashing . 
His voice was trembling with tears . 
`` So this is what I 've decided , Alyosha , listen , '' he began again , mastering his emotion . 
`` As soon as I arrive there with Grusha , we will set to work at once on the land , in solitude , somewhere very remote , with wild bears . 
There must be some remote parts even there . 
I am told there are still Redskins there , somewhere , on the edge of the horizon . 
So to the country of the Last of the Mohicans , and there we 'll tackle the grammar at once , Grusha and I. Work and grammar - that 's how we 'll spend three years . 
And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman . 
And as soon as we 've learnt it - good-bye to America ! 
We 'll run here to Russia as American citizens . 
Do n't be uneasy - we would not come to this little town . 
We 'd hide somewhere , a long way off , in the north or in the south . 
I shall be changed by that time , and she will , too , in America . 
The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my face - what 's the use of their being so mechanical ! 
- or else I 'll put out one eye , let my beard grow a yard , and I shall turn grey , fretting for Russia . 
I dare say they wo n't recognise us . 
And if they do , let them send us to Siberia - I do n't care . 
It will show it 's our fate . 
We 'll work on the land here , too , somewhere in the wilds , and I 'll make up as an American all my life . 
But we shall die on our own soil . 
That 's my plan , and it sha n't be altered . 
Do you approve ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Alyosha , not wanting to contradict him . 
Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly : `` And how they worked it up at the trial ! 
Did n't they work it up ! '' 
`` If they had not , you would have been convicted just the same , '' said Alyosha , with a sigh . 
`` Yes , people are sick of me here ! 
God bless them , but it 's hard , '' Mitya moaned miserably . 
Again there was silence for a minute . 
`` Alyosha , put me out of my misery at once ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Tell me , is she coming now , or not ? 
Tell me ? 
What did she say ? 
How did she say it ? '' 
`` She said she would come , but I do n't know whether she will come to-day . 
It 's hard for her , you know , '' Alyosha looked timidly at his brother . 
`` I should think it is hard for her ! 
Alyosha , it will drive me out of my mind . 
Grusha keeps looking at me . 
She understands . 
My God , calm my heart : what is it I want ? 
I want Katya ! 
Do I understand what I want ? 
It 's the headstrong , evil Karamazov spirit ! 
No , I am not fit for suffering . 
I am a scoundrel , that 's all one can say . '' 
`` Here she is ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway . 
For a moment she stood still , gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression . 
He leapt pulsively to his feet , and a scared look came into his face . 
He turned pale , but a timid , pleading smile appeared on his lips at once , and with an irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya . 
Seeing it , she flew impetuously to him . 
She seized him by the hands , and almost by force made him sit down on the bed . 
She sat down beside him , and still keeping his hands pressed them violently . 
Several times they both strove to speak , but stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile , their eyes fastened on one another . 
So passed two minutes . 
`` Have you forgiven me ? '' 
Mitya faltered at last , and at the same moment turning to Alyosha , his face working with joy , he cried , `` Do you hear what I am asking , do you hear ? '' 
`` That 's what I loved you for , that you are generous at heart ! '' 
broke from Katya . 
`` My forgiveness is no good to you , nor yours to me ; whether you forgive me or not , you will always be a sore place in my heart , and I in yours - so it must be ... '' She stopped to take breath . 
