Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days in Moscow , two years before . 
Lise was extremely touched by his story . 
Alyosha described Ilusha with warm feeling . 
When he finished describing how the luckless man trampled on the money , Lise could not help clasping her hands and crying out : `` So you did n't give him the money ! 
So you let him run away ! 
Oh , dear , you ought to have run after him ! '' 
`` No , Lise ; it 's better I did n't run after him , '' said Alyosha , getting up from his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room . 
`` How so ? 
How is it better ? 
Now they are without food and their case is hopeless . '' 
`` Not hopeless , for the two hundred roubles will still come to them . 
He 'll take the money to-morrow . 
To-morrow he will be sure to take it , '' said Alyosha , pacing up and down , pondering . 
`` You see , Lise , '' he went on , stopping suddenly before her , `` I made one blunder , but that , even that , is all for the best . '' 
`` What blunder , and why is it for the best ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
He is a man of weak and timorous character ; he has suffered so much and is very good-natured . 
I keep wondering why he took offence so suddenly , for I assure you , up to the last minute , he did not know that he was going to trample on the notes . 
And I think now that there was a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in his position ... . 
To begin with , he was sore at having been so glad of the money in my presence and not having concealed it from me . 
If he had been pleased , but not so much ; if he had not shown it ; if he had begun affecting scruples and difficulties , as other people do when they take money , he might still endure - to take it . 
But he was too genuinely delighted , and that was mortifying . 
Ah , Lise , he is a good and truthful man - that 's the worst of the whole business . 
All the while he talked , his voice was so weak , so broken , he talked so fast , so fast , he kept laughing such a laugh , or perhaps he was crying - yes , I am sure he was crying , he was so delighted - and he talked about his daughters - and about the situation he could get in another town ... . 
And when he had poured out his heart , he felt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul like that . 
So he began to hate me at once . 
He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people . 
What had made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon and accepted me as a friend , you see . 
At first he almost flew at me and tried to intimidate me , but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracing me ; he kept touching me with his hands . 
This must have been how he came to feel it all so humiliating , and then I made that blunder , a very important one . 
I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move to another town , we would give it to him , and , indeed , I myself would give him as much as he wanted out of my own money . 
That struck him all at once . 
Why , he thought , did I put myself forward to help him ? 
You know , Lise , it 's awfully hard for a man who has been injured , when other people look at him as though they were his benefactors ... . 
I 've heard that ; Father Zossima told me so . 
I do n't know how to put it , but I have often seen it myself . 
And I feel like that myself , too . 
And the worst of it was that though he did not know , to the very last minute , that he would trample on the notes , he had a kind of presentiment of it , I am sure of that . 
That 's just what made him so ecstatic , that he had that presentiment ... . 
And though it 's so dreadful , it 's all for the best . 
In fact , I believe nothing better could have happened . '' 
`` Why , why could nothing better have happened ? '' 
cried Lise , looking with great surprise at Alyosha . 
`` Because if he had taken the money , in an hour after getting home , he would be crying with mortification , that 's just what would have happened . 
And most likely he would have come to me early to-morrow , and perhaps have flung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now . 
But now he has gone home awfully proud and triumphant , though he knows he has ` ruined himself . ' 
So now nothing could be easier than to make him accept the two hundred roubles by to-morrow , for he has already vindicated his honour , tossed away the money , and trampled it under foot ... . 
He could n't know when he did it that I should bring it to him again to-morrow , and yet he is in terrible need of that money . 
Though he is proud of himself now , yet even to-day he 'll be thinking what a help he has lost . 
He will think of it more than ever at night , will dream of it , and by to-morrow morning he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness . 
It 's just then that I 'll appear . 
` Here , you are a proud man , ' I shall say : ` you have shown it ; but now take the money and forgive us ! ' 
And then he will take it ! 
Alyosha was carried away with joy as he uttered his last words , `` And then he will take it ! '' 
Lise clapped her hands . 
`` Ah , that 's true ! 
I understand that perfectly now . 
Ah , Alyosha , how do you know all this ? 
So young and yet he knows what 's in the heart ... . 
I should never have worked it out . '' 
`` The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on an equal footing with us , in spite of his taking money from us , '' Alyosha went on in his excitement , `` and not only on an equal , but even on a higher footing . '' '' 
` On a higher footing ' is charming , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; but go on , go on ! '' 
`` You mean there is n't such an expression as ` on a higher footing ' ; but that does n't matter because - '' `` Oh , no , of course it does n't matter . 
Forgive me , Alyosha , dear ... . 
You know , I scarcely respected you till now - that is I respected you but on an equal footing ; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing . 
Do n't be angry , dear , at my joking , '' she put in at once , with strong feeling . 
`` I am absurd and small , but you , you ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Is n't there in all our analysis - I mean your analysis ... no , better call it ours - are n't we showing contempt for him , for that poor man - in analysing his soul like this , as it were , from above , eh ? 
In deciding so certainly that he will take the money ? '' 
`` No , Lise , it 's not contempt , '' Alyosha answered , as though he had prepared himself for the question . 
`` I was thinking of that on the way here . 
How can it be contempt when we are all like him , when we are all just the same as he is ? 
For you know we are just the same , no better . 
If we are better , we should have been just the same in his place ... . 
I do n't know about you , Lise , but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways , and his soul is not sordid ; on the contrary , full of fine feeling ... . 
No , Lise , I have no contempt for him . 
Do you know , Lise , my elder told me once to care for most people exactly as one would for children , and for some of them as one would for the sick in hospitals . '' 
`` Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
dear , let us care for people as we would for the sick ! '' 
`` Let us , Lise ; I am ready . 
Though I am not altogether ready in myself . 
I am sometimes very impatient and at other times I do n't see things . 
It 's different with you . '' 
`` Ah , I do n't believe it ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , how happy I am ! '' 
`` I am so glad you say so , Lise . '' 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you are wonderfully good , but you are sometimes sort of formal ... . 
And yet you are not a bit formal really . 
Go to the door , open it gently , and see whether mamma is listening , '' said Lise , in a nervous , hurried whisper . 
Alyosha went , opened the door , and reported that no one was listening . 
`` Come here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Lise went on , flushing redder and redder . 
`` Give me your hand - that 's right . 
I have to make a great confession . 
I did n't write to you yesterday in joke , but in earnest , '' and she hid her eyes with her hand . 
It was evident that she was greatly ashamed of the confession . 
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times . 
`` Ah , Lise , what a good thing ! '' 
cried Alyosha joyfully . 
`` You know , I was perfectly sure you were in earnest . '' 
