`` I swear , Alyosha , '' he cried , with intense and genuine anger at himself ; `` You may not believe me , but as God is Holy , and as Christ is God , I swear that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now , I know that I am a million times baser in soul than she , and that these lofty sentiments of hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel 's . 
That 's the tragedy of it - that I know that for certain . 
What if anyone does show off a bit ? 
Do n't I do it myself ? 
And yet I 'm sincere , I 'm sincere . 
As for Ivan , I can understand how he must be cursing nature now with his intellect , too ! 
To see the preference given - to whom , to what ? 
To a monster who , though he is betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him , ca n't restrain his debaucheries - and before the very eyes of his betrothed ! 
And a man like me is preferred , while he is rejected . 
And why ? 
Because a girl wants to sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude . 
It 's ridiculous ! 
I 've never said a word of this to Ivan , and Ivan of course has never dropped a hint of the sort to me . 
But destiny will be accomplished , and the best man will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back-alley for ever - his filthy back-alley , his beloved back-alley , where he is at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will and with enjoyment . 
I 've been talking foolishly . 
I 've no words left . 
I used them at random , but it will be as I have said . 
I shall drown in the back-alley , and she will marry Ivan . '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri , '' Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety . 
`` There 's one thing you have n't made clear yet : you are still betrothed all the same , are n't you ? 
How can you break off the engagement if she , your betrothed , does n't want to ? '' 
`` Yes , formally and solemnly betrothed . 
It was all done on my arrival in Moscow , with great ceremony , with ikons , all in fine style . 
The general 's wife blessed us , and - would you believe it ? 
- congratulated Katya . 
You 've made a good choice , ' she said , ' I see right through him . ' 
And - would you believe it ? 
- she did n't like Ivan , and hardly greeted him . 
I had a lot of talk with Katya in Moscow . 
I told her about myself - sincerely , honourably . 
She listened to everything . 
There was sweet confusion , There were tender words . 
Though there were proud words , too . 
She wrung out of me a mighty promise to reform . 
I gave my promise , and here - '' `` What ? '' 
`` Why , I called to you and brought you out here to-day , this very day - remember it - to send you - this very day again - to Katerina Ivanovna , and - '' `` To tell her that I shall never come to see her again . 
Say , ` He sends you his compliments . ' '' 
`` But is that possible ? '' 
`` That 's just the reason I 'm sending you , in my place , because it 's impossible . 
And , how could I tell her myself ? '' 
`` And where are you going ? '' 
`` To the back-alley . '' 
`` To Grushenka , then ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed mournfully , clasping his hands . 
`` Can Rakitin really have told the truth ? 
I thought that you had just visited her , and that was all . '' 
`` Can a betrothed man pay such visits ? 
Is such a thing possible and with such a betrothed , and before the eyes of all the world ? 
Confound it , I have some honour ! 
As soon as I began visiting Grushenka , I ceased to be betrothed , and to be an honest man . 
I understand that . 
Why do you look at me ? 
You see , I went in the first place to beat her . 
I had heard , and I know for a fact now , that that captain , father 's agent , had given Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment , so as to put an end to me . 
They wanted to scare me . 
I went to beat her . 
I had had a glimpse of her before . 
She does n't strike one at first sight . 
I knew about her old merchant , who 's lying ill now , paralysed ; but he 's leaving her a decent little sum . 
I knew , too , that she was fond of money , that she hoarded it , and lent it at a wicked rate of interest , that she 's a merciless cheat and swindler . 
I went to beat her , and I stayed . 
The storm broke - it struck me down like the plague . 
I 'm plague-stricken still , and I know that everything is over , that there will never be anything more for me . 
The cycle of the ages is accomplished . 
That 's my position . 
And though I 'm a beggar , as fate would have it , I had three thousand just then in my pocket . 
I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe , a place twenty-five versts from here . 
I got Gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there drunk on it , and all the women and girls . 
I sent the thousands flying . 
In three days ' time I was stripped bare , but a hero . 
Do you suppose the hero had gained his end ? 
Not a sign of it from her . 
I tell you that rogue , Grushenka , has a supple curve all over her body . 
You can see it in her little foot , even in her little toe . 
I saw it , and kissed it , but that was all , I swear ! 
` I 'll marry you if you like , ' she said , ` you 're a beggar , you know . 
Say that you wo n't beat me , and will let me do anything I choose , and perhaps I will marry you . ' 
She laughed , and she 's laughing still ! '' 
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury . 
He seemed all at once as though he were drunk . 
His eyes became suddenly bloodshot . 
`` And do you really mean to marry her ? '' 
`` At once , if she will . 
And if she wo n't , I shall stay all the same . 
I 'll be the porter at her gate . 
Alyosha ! '' 
he cried . 
He stopped short before him , and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently . 
`` Do you know , you innocent boy , that this is all delirium , senseless delirium , for there 's a tragedy here . 
Let me tell you , Alexey , that I may be a low man , with low and degraded passions , but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri Karamazov never can be . 
Well , then ; let me tell you that I am a thief and a pickpocket . 
That very morning , just before I went to beat Grushenka , Katerina Ivanovna sent for me , and in strict secrecy -LRB- why I do n't know , I suppose she had some reason -RRB- asked me to go to the chief town of the province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow , so that nothing should be known of it in the town here . 
So I had that three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka , and it was that money we spent at Mokroe . 
Afterwards I pretended I had been to the town , but did not show her the post office receipt . 
I said I had sent the money and would bring the receipt , and so far I have n't brought it . 
I 've forgotten it . 
Now what do you think you 're going to her to-day to say ? 
` He sends his compliments , ' and she 'll ask you , ` What about the money ? ' 
You might still have said to her , ` He 's a degraded sensualist , and a low creature , with uncontrolled passions . 
He did n't send your money then , but wasted it , because , like a low brute , he could n't control himself . ' 
