For I can not imagine the horror and moral suffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him , that for his sake she had rejected her first lover , that she was summoning him , Mitya , to a new life , that she was promising him happiness - and when ? 
When everything was over for him and nothing was possible ! 
`` By the way , I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for the light it throws on the prisoner 's position at the moment . 
This woman , this love of his , had been till the last moment , till the very instant of his arrest , a being unattainable , passionately desired by him but unattainable . 
Yet why did he not shoot himself then , why did he relinquish his design and even forget where his pistol was ? 
It was just that passionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrained him . 
Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress , who was at the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him than ever - he did not leave her side , abasing himself in his homage before her . 
`` His passion might well , for a moment , stifle not only the fear of arrest , but even the torments of conscience . 
For a moment , oh , only for a moment ! 
I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved by these influences - first , the influence of drink , of noise and excitement , of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song , and of her , flushed with wine , singing and dancing and laughing to him ! 
Secondly , the hope in the background that the fatal end might still be far off , that not till next morning , at least , they would come and take him . 
So he had a few hours and that 's much , very much ! 
In a few hours one can think of many things . 
I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel when they are being taken to the scaffold . 
They have another long , long street to pass down and at walking pace , past thousands of people . 
Then there will be a turning into another street and only at the end of that street the dread place of execution ! 
I fancy that at the beginning of the journey the condemned man , sitting on his shameful cart , must feel that he has infinite life still before him . 
The houses recede , the cart moves on - oh , that 's nothing , it 's still far to the turning into the second street and he still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callously curious people with their eyes fixed on him , and he still fancies that he is just such a man as they . 
But now the turning comes to the next street . 
Oh , that 's nothing , nothing , there 's still a whole street before him , and however many houses have been passed , he will still think there are many left . 
And so to the very end , to the very scaffold . 
`` This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then . 
` They 've not had time yet , ' he must have thought , ' I may still find some way out , oh , there 's still time to make some plan of defence , and now , now - she is so fascinating ! ' 
`` His soul was full of confusion and dread , but he managed , however , to put aside half his money and hide it somewhere - I can not otherwise explain the disappearance of quite half of the three thousand he had just taken from his father 's pillow . 
He had been in Mokroe more than once before , he had caroused there for two days together already , he knew the old big house with all its passages and outbuildings . 
I imagine that part of the money was hidden in that house , not long before the arrest , in some crevice , under some floor , in some corner , under the roof . 
With what object ? 
I shall be asked . 
Why , the catastrophe may take place at once , of course ; he had n't yet considered how to meet it , he had n't the time , his head was throbbing and his heart was with her , but money - money was indispensable in any case ! 
With money a man is always a man . 
Perhaps such foresight at such a moment may strike you as unnatural ? 
But he assures us himself that a month before , at a critical and exciting moment , he had halved his money and sewn it up in a little bag . 
And though that was not true , as we shall prove directly , it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov , he had contemplated it . 
What 's more , when he declared at the inquiry that he had put fifteen hundred roubles in a bag -LRB- which never existed -RRB- he may have invented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment , because he had two hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe till morning , in case of emergency , simply not to have it on himself . 
Two extremes , gentlemen of the jury , remember that Karamazov can contemplate two extremes and both at once . 
`` We have looked in the house , but we have n't found the money . 
It may still be there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner 's hands now . 
In any case he was at her side , on his knees before her , she was lying on the bed , he had his hands stretched out to her and he had so entirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming to arrest him . 
He had n't time to prepare any line of defence in his mind . 
He was caught unawares and confronted with his judges , the arbiters of his destiny . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , there are moments in the execution of our duties when it is terrible for us to face a man , terrible on his account , too ! 
The moments of contemplating that animal fear , when the criminal sees that all is lost , but still struggles , still means to struggle , the moments when every instinct of self-preservation rises up in him at once and he looks at you with questioning and suffering eyes , studies you , your face , your thoughts , uncertain on which side you will strike , and his distracted mind frames thousands of plans in an instant , but he is still afraid to speak , afraid of giving himself away ! 
This purgatory of the spirit , this animal thirst for self-preservation , these humiliating moments of the human soul , are awful , and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for the criminal even in the lawyer . 
And this was what we all witnessed then . 
`` At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some very compromising phrases . 
` Blood ! 
I 've deserved it ! ' 
But he quickly restrained himself . 
He had not prepared what he was to say , what answer he was to make , he had nothing but a bare denial ready . ' 
I am not guilty of my father 's death . ' 
That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hoped to throw up a barricade of some sort . 
His first compromising exclamations he hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the death of the servant Grigory only . 
` Of that bloodshed I am guilty , but who has killed my father , gentlemen , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him , if not I ? ' 
Do you hear , he asked us that , us , who had come to ask him that question ! 
Do you hear that uttered with such premature haste - ` if not I ' - the animal cunning , the naivete the Karamazov impatience of it ? ' 
I did n't kill him and you must n't think I did ! 
I wanted to kill him , gentlemen , I wanted to kill him , ' he hastens to admit -LRB- he was in a hurry , in a terrible hurry -RRB- , ` but still I am not guilty , it is not I murdered him . ' 
He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him , as though to say , you can see for yourselves how truthful I am , so you 'll believe all the sooner that I did n't murder him . 
Oh , in such cases the criminal is often amazingly shallow and credulous . 
`` At that point one of the lawyers asked him , as it were incidentally , the most simple question , ` Was n't it Smerdyakov killed him ? ' 
Then , as we expected , he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caught him unawares , before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch the moment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov 's name . 
He rushed at once to the other extreme , as he always does , and began to assure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him , was not capable of it . 
But do n't believe him , that was only his cunning ; he did n't really give up the idea of Smerdyakov ; on the contrary , he meant to bring him forward again ; for , indeed , he had no one else to bring forward , but he would do that later , because for the moment that line was spoiled for him . 
He would bring him forward perhaps next day , or even a few days later , choosing an opportunity to cry out to us , ` You know I was more sceptical about Smerdyakov than you , you remember that yourselves , but now I am convinced . 
He killed him , he must have done ! ' 
And for the present he falls back upon a gloomy and irritable denial . 
Impatience and anger prompted him , however , to the most inept and incredible explanation of how he looked into his father 's window and how he respectfully withdrew . 
The worst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs , of the evidence given by Grigory . 
`` We proceeded to search him . 
The search angered , but encouraged him , the whole three thousand had not been found on him , only half of it . 
And no doubt only at that moment of angry silence , the fiction of the little bag first occurred to him . 
No doubt he was conscious himself of the improbability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound more likely , to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible . 
In such cases the first duty , the chief task of the investigating lawyers , is to prevent the criminal being prepared , to pounce upon him unexpectedly so that he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity , improbability and inconsistency . 
The criminal can only be made to speak by the sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact , of some circumstance of great importance in the case , of which he had no previous idea and could not have foreseen . 
We had such a fact in readiness - that was Grigory 's evidence about the open door through which the prisoner had run out . 
He had completely forgotten about that door and had not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it . 
`` The effect of it was amazing . 
He leapt up and shouted to us , ` Then Smerdyakov murdered him , it was Smerdyakov ! ' 
and so betrayed the basis of the defence he was keeping back , and betrayed it in its most improbable shape , for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he had knocked Grigory down and run away . 
When we told him that Grigory saw the door was open before he fell down , and had heard Smerdyakov behind the screen as he came out of his bedroom - Karamazov was positively crushed . 
My esteemed and witty colleague , Nikolay Parfenovitch , told me afterwards that he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him . 
And to improve matters , the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much-talked-of little bag - so be it , you shall hear this romance ! 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I have told you already why I consider this romance not only an absurdity , but the most improbable invention that could have been brought forward in the circumstances . 
If one tried for a bet to invent the most unlikely story , one could hardly find anything more incredible . 
The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers can always be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which real life is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary storytellers neglect as insignificant trifles . 
Oh , they have no thought to spare for such details , their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as a whole , and fancy anyone daring to pull them up for a trifle ! 
But that 's how they are caught . 
The prisoner was asked the question , ` Where did you get the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you ? ' ' 
I made it myself . ' 
` And where did you get the linen ? ' 
The prisoner was positively offended , he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivial question , and would you believe it , his resentment was genuine ! 
But they are all like that . ' 
I tore it off my shirt . 
`` Then we shall find that shirt among your linen to-morrow , with a piece torn off . ' 
And only fancy , gentlemen of the jury , if we really had found that torn shirt -LRB- and how could we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk ? -RRB- 
that would have been a fact , a material fact in support of his statement ! 
But he was incapable of that reflection . ' 
I do n't remember , it may not have been off my shirt , I sewed it up in one of my landlady 's caps . ' 
` What sort of a cap ? ' 
