`` I earnestly beg you , too , not to disturb yourself , and not to be uneasy , '' the elder said impressively . 
`` Do not trouble . 
Make yourself quite at home . 
And , above all , do not be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all . '' 
`` Quite at home ? 
To be my natural self ? 
Oh , that is much too much , but I accept it with grateful joy . 
Do you know , blessed father , you 'd better not invite me to be my natural self . 
Do n't risk it ... . 
I will not go so far as that myself . 
I warn you for your own sake . 
Well , the rest is still plunged in the mists of uncertainty , though there are people who 'd be pleased to describe me for you . 
I mean that for you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
But as for you , holy being , let me tell you , I am brimming over with ecstasy . '' 
He got up , and throwing up his hands , declaimed , `` Blessed be the womb that bare thee , and the paps that gave thee suck - the paps especially . 
When you said just now , ` Do n't be so ashamed of yourself , for that is at the root of it all , ' you pierced right through me by that remark , and read me to the core . 
Indeed , I always feel when I meet people that I am lower than all , and that they all take me for a buffoon . 
So I say , ` Let me really play the buffoon . 
I am not afraid of your opinion , for you are every one of you worse than I am . ' 
That is why I am a buffoon . 
It is from shame , great elder , from shame ; it 's simply over-sensitiveness that makes me rowdy . 
If I had only been sure that everyone would accept me as the kindest and wisest of men , oh , Lord , what a good man I should have been then ! 
Teacher ! '' 
he fell suddenly on his knees , `` what must I do to gain eternal life ? '' 
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really moved . 
Father Zossima , lifting his eyes , looked at him , and said with a smile : `` You have known for a long time what you must do . 
You have sense enough : do n't give way to drunkenness and incontinence of speech ; do n't give way to sensual lust ; and , above all , to the love of money . 
And close your taverns . 
If you ca n't close all , at least two or three . 
And , above all - do n't lie . '' 
`` You mean about Diderot ? '' 
`` No , not about Diderot . 
Above all , do n't lie to yourself . 
The man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a pass that he can not distinguish the truth within him , or around him , and so loses all respect for himself and for others . 
And having no respect he ceases to love , and in order to occupy and distract himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures , and sinks to bestiality in his vices , all from continual lying to other men and to himself . 
The man who lies to himself can be more easily offended than anyone . 
You know it is sometimes very pleasant to take offence , is n't it ? 
A man may know that nobody has insulted him , but that he has invented the insult for himself , has lied and exaggerated to make it picturesque , has caught at a word and made a mountain out of a molehill - he knows that himself , yet he will be the first to take offence , and will revel in his resentment till he feels great pleasure in it , and so pass to genuine vindictiveness . 
But get up , sit down , I beg you . 
All this , too , is deceitful posturing ... '' `` Blessed man ! 
Give me your hand to kiss . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up , and imprinted a rapid kiss on the elder 's thin hand . 
`` It is , it is pleasant to take offence . 
You said that so well , as I never heard it before . 
Yes , I have been all my life taking offence , to please myself , taking offence on aesthetic grounds , for it is not so much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted - that you had forgotten , great elder , it is distinguished ! 
I shall make a note of that . 
But I have been lying , lying positively my whole life long , every day and hour of it . 
Of a truth , I am a lie , and the father of lies . 
Though I believe I am not the father of lies . 
I am getting mixed in my texts . 
Say , the son of lies , and that will be enough . 
Only ... my angel ... may sometimes talk about Diderot ! 
Diderot will do no harm , though sometimes a word will do harm . 
Great elder , by the way , I was forgetting , though I had been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose to ask and to find out something . 
Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch not to interrupt me . 
Here is my question : Is it true , great Father , that the story is told somewhere in the Lives of the Saints of a holy saint martyred for his faith who , when his head was cut off at last , stood up , picked up his head , and , ` courteously kissing it , ' walked a long way , carrying it in his hands . 
Is that true or not , honoured Father ? '' 
`` No , it is untrue , '' said the elder . 
`` There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints . 
What saint do you say the story is told of ? '' 
asked the Father Librarian . 
`` I do not know what saint . 
I do not know , and ca n't tell . 
I was deceived . 
I was told the story . 
I had heard it , and do you know who told it ? 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov here , was so angry just now about Diderot . 
He it was who told the story . '' 
`` I have never told it you , I never speak to you at all . '' 
`` It is true you did not tell me , but you told it when I was present . 
It was three years ago . 
I mentioned it because by that ridiculous story you shook my faith , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
You knew nothing of it , but I went home with my faith shaken , and I have been getting more and more shaken ever since . 
Yes , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , you were the cause of a great fall . 
That was not a Diderot ! 
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic , though it was perfectly clear to everyone by now that he was playing a part again . 
Yet Miusov was stung by his words . 
`` What nonsense , and it is all nonsense , '' he muttered . 
`` I may really have told it , some time or other ... but not to you . 
I was told it myself . 
I heard it in Paris from a Frenchman . 
He told me it was read at our mass from the Lives of the Saints ... he was a very learned man who had made a special study of Russian statistics and had lived a long time in Russia ... . 
I have not read the Lives of the Saints myself , and I am not going to read them ... all sorts of things are said at dinner - we were dining then . '' 
`` Yes , you were dining then , and so I lost my faith ! '' 
said Fyodor Pavlovitch , mimicking him . 
`` What do I care for your faith ? '' 
Miusov was on the point of shouting , but he suddenly checked himself , and said with contempt , `` You defile everything you touch . '' 
The elder suddenly rose from his seat . 
`` Excuse me , gentlemen , for leaving you a few minutes , '' he said , addressing all his guests . 
`` I have visitors awaiting me who arrived before you . 
But do n't you tell lies all the same , '' he added , turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch with a good-humoured face . 
He went out of the cell . 
Alyosha and the novice flew to escort him down the steps . 
Alyosha was breathless : he was glad to get away , but he was glad , too , that the elder was good-humoured and not offended . 
Father Zossima was going towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch persisted , in stopping him at the door of the cell . 
`` Blessed man ! '' 
he cried , with feeling . 
`` Allow me to kiss your hand once more . 
Yes , with you I could still talk , I could still get on . 
