His pointed beard was small and scanty , and his lips , which smiled frequently , were as thin as two threads . 
His nose was not long , but sharp , like a bird 's beak . 
`` To all appearances a malicious soul , full of petty pride , '' thought Miusov . 
He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position . 
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly , and served to begin the conversation . 
`` Precisely to our time , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but no sign of my son , Dmitri . 
I apologise for him , sacred elder ! '' 
-LRB- Alyosha shuddered all over at `` sacred elder '' . -RRB- 
`` I am always punctual myself , minute for minute , remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings ... `` But you are not a king , anyway , '' Miusov muttered , losing his self-restraint at once . 
`` Yes ; that 's true . 
I 'm not a king , and , would you believe it , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I was aware of that myself . 
But , there ! 
I always say the wrong thing . 
Your reverence , '' he cried , with sudden pathos , `` you behold before you a buffoon in earnest ! 
I introduce myself as such . 
It 's an old habit , alas ! 
And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it 's with an object , with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable . 
One must be agreeable , must n't one ? 
I was seven years ago in a little town where I had business , and I made friends with some merchants there . 
We went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something , and to ask him to dine with us . 
He was a tall , fat , fair , sulky man , the most dangerous type in such cases . 
It 's their liver . 
I went straight up to him , and with the ease of a man of the world , you know , ` Mr. Ispravnik , ' said I , ` be our Napravnik . ' 
` What do you mean by Napravnik ? ' 
said he . 
I saw , at the first half-second , that it had missed fire . 
He stood there so glum . ' 
I wanted to make a joke , ' said I , ` for the general diversion , as Mr. Napravnik is our well-known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the harmony of our undertaking is someone of that sort . ' 
And I explained my comparison very reasonably , did n't I ? 
` Excuse me , ' said he , ' I am an Ispravnik , and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling . ' 
He turned and walked away . 
I followed him , shouting , ` Yes , yes , you are an Ispravnik , not a Napravnik . ' 
` No , ' he said , ` since you called me a Napravnik I am one . ' 
And would you believe it , it ruined our business ! 
And I 'm always like that , always like that . 
Always injuring myself with my politeness . 
Once , many years ago , I said to an influential person : ` Your wife is a ticklish lady , ' in an honourable sense , of the moral qualities , so to speak . 
But he asked me , ` Why , have you tickled her ? ' 
I thought I 'd be polite , so I could n't help saying , ` Yes , ' and he gave me a fine tickling on the spot . 
Only that happened long ago , so I 'm not ashamed to tell the story . 
I 'm always injuring myself like that . '' 
`` You 're doing it now , '' muttered Miusov , with disgust . 
Father Zossima scrutinised them both in silence . 
`` Am I ? 
Would you believe it , I was aware of that , too , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , and let tell you , indeed , I foresaw I should as soon as I began to speak . 
And do you know I foresaw , too , that you 'd be the first to remark on it . 
The minute I see my joke is n't coming off , your reverence , both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in them . 
That 's been so since I was young , when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen 's families . 
I am an inveterate buffoon , and have been from birth up , your reverence , it 's as though it were a craze in me . 
I dare say it 's a devil within me . 
But only a little one . 
A more serious one would have chosen another lodging . 
But not your soul , Pyotr Alexandrovitch ; you 're not a lodging worth having either . 
But I do believe - I believe in God , though I have had doubts of late . 
But now I sit and await words of wisdom . 
I 'm like the philosopher , Diderot , your reverence . 
Did you ever hear , most Holy Father , how Diderot went to see the Metropolitan Platon , in the time of the Empress Catherine ? 
He went in and said straight out , ` There is no God . ' 
To which the great bishop lifted up his finger and answered , ` The fool has said in his heart there is no God and he fell down at his feet on the spot . ' 
I believe , ' he cried , ` and will be christened . ' 
And so he was . 
Princess Dashkov was his godmother , and Potyomkin his godfather . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , this is unbearable ! 
You know you 're telling lies and that that stupid anecdote is n't true . 
Why are you playing the fool ? '' 
cried Miusov in a shaking voice . 
`` I suspected all my life that it was n't true , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cried with conviction . 
`` But I 'll tell you the whole truth , gentlemen . 
Great elder ! 
Forgive me , the last thing about Diderot 's christening I made up just now . 
I never thought of it before . 
I made it up to add piquancy . 
I play the fool , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , to make myself agreeable . 
Though I really do n't know myself , sometimes , what I do it for . 
And as for Diderot , I heard as far as ` the fool hath said in his heart ' twenty times from the gentry about here when I was young . 
I heard your aunt , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , tell the story . 
They all believe to this day that the infidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan Platon ... '' Miusov got up , forgetting himself in his impatience . 
He was furious , and conscious of being ridiculous . 
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible . 
For forty or fifty years past , from the times of former elders , no visitors had entered that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration . 
Almost everyone admitted to the cell felt that a great favour was being shown him . 
Many remained kneeling during the whole visit . 
Of those visitors , many had been men of high rank and learning , some even free thinkers , attracted by curiosity , but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverence and delicacy , for here there was no question of money , but only , on the one side love and kindness , and on the other penitence and eager desire to decide some spiritual problem or crisis . 
So that such buffoonery amazed and bewildered the spectators , or at least some of them . 
The monks , with unchanged countenances , waited , with earnest attention , to hear what the elder would say , but seemed on the point of standing up , like Miusov . 
Alyosha stood , with hanging head , on the verge of tears . 
What seemed to him strangest of all was that his brother Ivan , on whom alone he had rested his hopes , and who alone had such influence on his father that he could have stopped him , sat now quite unmoved , with downcast eyes , apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end , as though he had nothing to do with it . 
Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin , the divinity student , whom he knew almost intimately . 
He alone in the monastery knew Rakitin 's thoughts . 
`` Forgive me , '' began Miusov , addressing Father Zossima , `` for perhaps I seem to be taking part in this shameful foolery . 
I made a mistake in believing that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on a visit to so honoured a personage . 
I did not suppose I should have to apologise simply for having come with him ... '' Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more , and was about to leave the room , overwhelmed with confusion . 
`` Do n't distress yourself , I beg . '' 
The elder got on to his feeble legs , and taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands , made him sit down again . 
`` I beg you not to disturb yourself . 
I particularly beg you to be my guest . '' 
And with a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa . 
`` Great elder , speak ! 
Do I annoy you by my vivacity ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried suddenly , clutching the arms of his chair in both hands , as though ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavourable . 
