I know myself that Samsonov , her merchant , was laughing with her about it , telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do . 
And she 's got plenty of sense . 
She would n't marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
So , taking that into consideration , Ivan Fyodorovitch , reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch , would have anything after the master 's death , not a rouble , for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole , all the money there is . 
But if your father were to die now , there 'd be some forty thousand for sure , even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so , for he 's made no will ... . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well . '' 
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan 's face . 
He suddenly flushed . 
`` Then why on earth , '' he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov , `` do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
If I go away , you see what will happen here . '' 
Ivan drew his breath with difficulty . 
`` Precisely so , '' said Smerdyakov , softly and reasonably , watching Ivan intently , however . 
`` What do you mean by ` precisely so ' ? '' 
Ivan questioned him , with a menacing light in his eyes , restraining himself with difficulty . 
`` I spoke because I felt sorry for you . 
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position , '' answered Smerdyakov , with the most candid air looking at Ivan 's flashing eyes . 
They were both silent . 
`` You seem to be a perfect idiot , and what 's more ... an awful scoundrel , too . '' 
Ivan rose suddenly from the bench . 
He was about to pass straight through the gate , but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov . 
Something strange followed . 
Ivan , in a sudden paroxysm , bit his lip , clenched his fists , and , in another minute , would have flung himself on Smerdyakov . 
The latter , anyway , noticed it at the same moment , started , and shrank back . 
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov , and Ivan turned in silence , as it seemed in perplexity , to the gate . 
`` I am going away to Moscow to-morrow , if you care to know - early to-morrow morning . 
That 's all ! '' 
he suddenly said aloud angrily , and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov . 
`` That 's the best thing you can do , '' he responded , as though he had expected to hear it ; `` except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow , if anything should happen here . '' 
Ivan stopped again , and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov . 
But a change had passed over him , too . 
All his familiarity and carelessnes had completely disappeared . 
His face expressed attention and expectation , intent but timid and cringing . 
`` Have n't you something more to say - something to add ? '' 
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan . 
`` And could n't I be sent for from Tchermashnya , too - in case anything happened ? '' 
Ivan shouted suddenly , for some unknown reason raising his voice . 
`` From Tchermashnya , too ... you could be sent for , '' Smerdyakov muttered , almost in a whisper , looking disconcerted , but gazing intently into Ivan 's eyes . 
`` Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer . 
Is it to save my spending money on the fare , or to save my going so far out of my way , that you insist on Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` Precisely so ... '' muttered Smerdyakov , with a breaking voice . 
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile , and again made ready to draw back . 
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh , and went through the gate still laughing . 
Anyone who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart , and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant . 
He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy . 
`` It 's Always Worth While Speaking to a Clever Man '' AND in the same nervous frenzy , too , he spoke . 
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in , he shouted to him , waving his hands , `` I am going upstairs to my room , not in to you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
and passed by , trying not even to look at his father . 
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment ; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose . 
Receiving this amiable greeting , he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs , till he passed out of sight . 
`` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
he promptly asked Smerdyakov , who had followed Ivan . 
`` Angry about something . 
Who can tell ? '' 
the valet muttered evasively . 
`` Confound him ! 
Let him be angry then . 
Bring in the samovar , and get along with you . 
Look sharp ! 
No news ? '' 
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan , all relating to his expected visitor , and these questions we will omit . 
Half an hour later the house was locked , and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon . 
Now and then he peered out into the darkness , seeing nothing . 
It was very late , but Ivan was still awake and reflecting . 
He sat up late that night , till two o'clock . 
But we will not give an account of his thoughts , and this is not the place to look into that soul - its turn will come . 
And even if one tried , it would be very hard to give an account of them , for there were no thoughts in his brain , but something very vague , and , above all , intense excitement . 
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings . 
He was fretted , too , by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires ; for instance , after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down , open the door , go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov . 
But if he had been asked why , he could not have given any exact reason , except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than anyone in the world . 
On the other hand , he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror , which he felt positively paralysed his physical powers . 
His head ached and he was giddy . 
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart , as though he meant to avenge himself on someone . 
He even hated Alyosha , recalling the conversation he had just had with him . 
At moments he hated himself intensely . 
Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think , and wondered greatly at this afterwards , especially as he remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow , something had whispered in his heart , `` That 's nonsense , you are not going , and it wo n't be so easy to tear yourself away as you are boasting now . '' 
Remembering that night long afterwards , Ivan recalled with peculiar repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily , as though he were afraid of being watched , opened the door , gone out on the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below , had listened a long while - some five minutes - with a sort of strange curiosity , holding his breath while his heart throbbed . 
And why he had done all this , why he was listening , he could not have said . 
That `` action '' all his life afterwards he called `` infamous , '' and at the bottom of his heart , he thought of it as the basest action of his life . 
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment , but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now . 
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room , listening , listening - for someone to knock . 
Ivan went out on the stairs twice to listen like this . 
About two o'clock when everything was quiet , and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed , Ivan had got into bed , firmly resolved to fall asleep at once , as he felt fearfully exhausted . 
And he did fall asleep at once , and slept soundly without dreams , but waked early , at seven o'clock , when it was broad daylight . 
Opening his eyes , he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous . 
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly ; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately . 
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning . 
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure . 
And his departure certainly was sudden . 
Though Ivan had said the day before -LRB- to Katerina Ivanovna , Alyosha , and Smerdyakov -RRB- that he was leaving next day , yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed , or , at least , had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk . 
At last his trunk and bag were ready . 
It was about nine o'clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry , `` Where will your honour take your tea , in your own room or downstairs ? '' 
He looked almost cheerful , but there was about him , about his words and gestures , something hurried and scattered . 
Greeting his father affably , and even inquiring specially after his health , though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end , he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good , and begged him to send for the horses . 
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise , and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him . 
Instead of doing so , he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own . 
`` What a fellow you are ! 
Not to tell me yesterday ! 
