He was incapable of passive love . 
If he loved anyone , he set to work at once to help him . 
And to do so he must know what he was aiming at ; he must know for certain what was best for each , and having ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both . 
But instead of a definite aim , he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all sides . 
`` It was lacerating , '' as was said just now . 
But what could he understand even in this `` laceration '' ? 
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze . 
Seeing Alyosha , Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan , who had already got up to go , `` A minute ! 
Stay another minute ! 
I want to hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely . 
Do n't go away , '' she added , addressing Madame Hohlakov . 
She made Alyosha sit down beside her , and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite , by Ivan . 
`` You are all my friends here , all I have in the world , dear friends , '' she warmly , in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of suffering , and Alyosha 's heart warmed to her at once . 
`` You , Alexey Fyodorovitch , were witness yesterday of that abominable scene , and saw what I did . 
You did not see it , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he did . 
What he thought of me yesterday I do n't know . 
I only know one thing , that if it were repeated to-day , this minute , I should express the same feelings again as yesterday - the same feelings , the same words , the same actions . 
You remember my actions , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; you checked me in one of them '' ... -LRB- as she said that , she flushed and her eyes shone -RRB- . 
`` I must tell you that I ca n't get over it . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't even know whether I still love him . 
I feel pity for him , and that is a poor sign of love . 
If I loved him , if I still loved him , perhaps I should n't be sorry for him now , but should hate him '' . 
Her voice quivered and tears glittered on her eyelashes . 
Alyosha shuddered inwardly . 
`` That girl is truthful and sincere , '' he thought , `` and she does not love Dmitri any more . '' 
`` That 's true , that 's true , '' cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Wait , dear . 
I have n't told you the chief , the final decision I came to during the night . 
I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one - for me , but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it - nothing . 
It will be so all my life . 
My dear , kind , ever-faithful and generous adviser , the one friend I have in the world , Ivan Fyodorovitch , with his deep insight into the heart , approves and commends my decision . 
He knows it . '' 
`` Yes , I approve of it , '' Ivan assented , in a subdued but firm voice . 
`` But I should like Alyosha , too -LRB- Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , forgive my calling you simply Alyosha -RRB- , I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch , too , to tell me before my two friends whether I am right . 
I feel instinctively that you , Alyosha , my dear brother -LRB- for are a dear brother to me -RRB- , '' she said again ecstatically , taking his cold hand in her hot one , `` I foresee that your decision , your approval , will bring me peace , in spite of all my sufferings , for , after your words , I shall be calm and submit - I feel that . '' 
`` I do n't know what you are asking me , '' said Alyosha , flushing . 
`` I only know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than my own ! 
... But I know nothing about such affairs , '' something impelled him to add hurriedly . 
`` In such affairs , Alexey Fyodorovitch , in such affairs , the chief thing is honour and duty and something higher - I do n't know what but higher perhaps even than duty . 
I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart , and it compels me irresistibly . 
But it may all be put in two words . 
I 've already decided , even if he marries that - creature , '' she began solemnly , `` whom I never , never can forgive , even then I will not abandon him . 
Henceforward I will never , never abandon him ! '' 
she cried , breaking into a sort of pale , hysterical ecstasy . 
`` Not that I would run after him continually , get in his way and worry him . 
Oh , no ! 
I will go away to another town - where you like - but I will watch over him all my life - I will watch over him all my life unceasingly . 
When he becomes unhappy with that woman , and that is bound to happen quite soon , let him come to me and he will find a friend , a sister ... Only a sister , of course , and so for ever ; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister , who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him . 
I will gain my point . 
I will insist on his knowing me confiding entirely in me , without reserve , '' she cried , in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I will be a god to whom he can pray - and that , at least , he owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through him . 
And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the promise I gave him , in spite of his being untrue and betraying me . 
I will - I will become nothing but a means for his happiness , or - how shall I say ? 
- an instrument , a machine for his happiness , and that for my whole life , my whole life , and that he may see that all his life ! 
That 's my decision . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me . '' 
She was breathless . 
She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more dignity , art and naturalness , but her speech was too hurried and crude . 
It was full of youthful impulsiveness , it betrayed that she was still smarting from yesterday 's insult , and that her pride craved satisfaction . 
She felt this herself . 
Her face suddenly darkened , an unpleasant look came into her eyes . 
Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy . 
His brother Ivan made it worse by adding : `` I 've only expressed my own view , '' he said . 
`` From anyone else , this would have been affected and over-strained , but from you - no . 
Any other woman would have been wrong , but you are right . 
I do n't know how to explain it , but I see that you are absolutely genuine and , therefore , you are right . '' 
`` But that 's only for the moment . 
And what does this moment stand for ? 
Nothing but yesterday 's insult . '' 
Madame Hohlakov obviously had not intended to interfere , but she could not refrain from this very just comment . 
`` Quite so , quite so , '' cried Ivan , with peculiar eagerness , obviously annoyed at being interrupted , `` in anyone else this moment would be only due to yesterday 's impression and would be only a moment . 
But with Katerina Ivanovna 's character , that moment will last all her life . 
What for anyone else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting burdensome , grim perhaps , but unflagging duty . 
And she will be sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled . 
Your life , Katerina Ivanovna , will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings , your own heroism , and your own suffering ; but in the end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfilment of a bold and proud design . 
Yes , proud it certainly is , and desperate in any case , but a triumph for you . 
And the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else . '' 
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention ; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with intention . 
`` Oh , dear , how mistaken it all is ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov cried again . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you speak . 
I want dreadfully to know what you will say ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and burst into tears . 
Alyosha got up from the sofa . 
`` It 's nothing , nothing ! '' 
she went on through her tears . 
`` I 'm upset , I did n't sleep last night . 
But by the side of two such friends as you and your brother I still feel strong - for I know you two will never desert me . '' 
`` Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow - perhaps to-morrow - and to leave you for a long time - and , unluckily , it 's unavoidable , '' Ivan said suddenly . 
`` To-morrow - to Moscow ! '' 
her face was suddenly contorted ; `` but - but , dear me , how fortunate ! '' 
she cried in a voice suddenly changed . 
In one instant there was no trace left of her tears . 
She underwent an instantaneous transformation , which amazed Alyosha . 
Instead of a poor , insulted girl , weeping in a sort of `` laceration , '' he saw a woman completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased , as though something agreeable had just happened . 
`` Oh , not fortunate that I am losing you , of course not , '' she collected herself suddenly , with a charming society smile . 
`` Such a friend as you are could not suppose that . 
I am only too unhappy at losing you . '' 
