`` I believe that is it . '' 
`` And , if so , he 's not altogether lost . 
I can still save him . 
Stay ! 
Did he not tell you anything about money - about three thousand roubles ? '' 
`` He did speak about it , and it 's that more than anything that 's crushing him . 
He said he had lost his honour and that nothing matters now , '' Alyosha answered warmly , feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing that there really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother . 
`` But do you know about the money ? '' 
he added , and suddenly broke off . 
`` I 've known of it a long time ; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire , and heard long ago that the money had not arrived . 
He had n't sent the money , but I said nothing . 
Last week I learnt that he was still in need of money . 
My only object in all this was that he should know to whom to turn , and who was his true friend . 
No , he wo n't recognise that I am his truest friend ; he wo n't know me , and looks on me merely as a woman . 
I 've been tormented all the week , trying to think how to prevent him from being ashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand . 
Let him feel ashamed of himself , let him be ashamed of other people 's knowing , but not of my knowing . 
He can tell God everything without shame . 
Why is it he still does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake ? 
Why , why does n't he know me ? 
How dare he not know me after all that has happened ? 
I want to save him for ever . 
Let him forget me as his betrothed . 
And here he fears that he is dishonoured in my eyes . 
Why , he was n't afraid to be open with you , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
How is it that I do n't deserve the same ? '' 
The last words she uttered in tears . 
Tears gushed from her eyes . 
`` I must tell you , '' Alyosha began , his voice trembling too , `` what happened just now between him and my father . '' 
And he described the whole scene , how Dmitri had sent him to get the money , how he had broken in , knocked his father down , and after that had again specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments and farewell . 
`` He went to that woman , '' Alyosha added softly . 
`` And do you suppose that I ca n't put up with that woman ? 
Does he think I ca n't ? 
But he wo n't marry her , '' she suddenly laughed nervously . 
`` Could such a passion last for ever in a Karamazov ? 
It 's passion , not love . 
He wo n't marry her because she wo n't marry him . '' 
Again Katerina Ivanovna laughed strangely . 
`` He may marry her , '' said Alyosha mournfully , looking down . 
`` He wo n't marry her , I tell you . 
That girl is an angel . 
Do you know that ? 
Do you know that ? '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinary warmth . 
`` She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures . 
I know how bewitching she is , but I know too that she is kind , firm , and noble . 
Why do you look at me like that , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? 
Perhaps you are wondering at my words , perhaps you do n't believe me ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , my angel ! '' 
she cried suddenly to someone , peeping into the next room , `` come in to us . 
This is a friend . 
This is Alyosha . 
He knows all about our affairs . 
Show yourself to him . '' 
`` I 've only been waiting behind the curtain for you to call me , '' said a soft , one might even say sugary , feminine voice . 
The portiere was raised and Grushenka herself , smiling and beaming , came up to the table . 
A violent revulsion passed over Alyosha . 
He fixed his eyes on her and could not take them off . 
Here she was , that awful woman , the `` beast , '' as Ivan had called her half an hour before . 
And yet one would have thought the creature standing before him most simple and ordinary , a good-natured , kind woman , handsome certainly , but so like other handsome ordinary women ! 
It is true she was very , very good-looking with that Russian beauty so passionately loved by many men . 
She was a rather tall woman , though a little shorter than Katerina Ivanovna , who was exceptionally tall . 
She had a full figure , with soft , as it were , noiseless , movements , softened to a peculiar over-sweetness , like her voice . 
She moved , not like Katerina Ivanovna , with a vigorous , bold step , but noiselessly . 
Her feet made absolutely no sound on the floor . 
She sank softly into a low chair , softly rustling her sumptuous black silk dress , and delicately nestling her milk-white neck and broad shoulders in a costly cashmere shawl . 
She was twenty-two years old , and her face looked exactly that age . 
She was very white in the face , with a pale pink tint on her cheeks . 
The modelling of her face might be said to be too broad , and the lower jaw was set a trifle forward . 
Her upper lip was thin , but the slightly prominent lower lip was at least twice as full , and looked pouting . 
But her magnificent , abundant dark brown hair , her sable-coloured eyebrows and charming greyblue eyes with their long lashes would have made the most indifferent person , meeting her casually in a crowd in the street , stop at the sight of her face and remember it long after . 
What struck Alyosha most in that face was its expression of childlike good nature . 
There was a childlike look in her eyes , a look of childish delight . 
She came up to the table , beaming with delight and seeming to expect something with childish , impatient , and confiding curiosity . 
The light in her eyes gladdened the soul - Alyosha felt that . 
There was something else in her which he could not understand , or would not have been able to define , and which yet perhaps unconsciously affected him . 
It was that softness , that voluptuousness of her bodily movements , that catlike noiselessness . 
Yet it was a vigorous , ample body . 
Under the shawl could be seen full broad shoulders , a high , still quite girlish bosom . 
Her figure suggested the lines of the Venus of Milo , though already in somewhat exaggerated proportions . 
That could be divined . 
Connoisseurs of Russian beauty could have foretold with certainty that this fresh , still youthful beauty would lose its harmony by the age of thirty , would `` spread '' ; that the face would become puffy , and that wrinkles would very soon appear upon her forehead and round the eyes ; the complexion would grow coarse and red perhaps - in fact , that it was the beauty of the moment , the fleeting beauty which is so often met with in Russian women . 
Alyosha , of course , did not think of this ; but though he was fascinated , yet he wondered with an unpleasant sensation , and as it were regretfully , why she drawled in that way and could not speak naturally . 
She did so , evidently feeling there was a charm in the exaggerated , honeyed modulation of the syllables . 
It was , of course , only a bad , underbred habit that showed bad education and a false idea of good manners . 
And yet this intonation and manner of speaking impressed Alyosha as almost incredibly incongruous with the childishly simple and happy expression of her face , the soft , babyish joy in her eyes . 
Katerina Ivanovna at once made her sit down in an arm-chair facing Alyosha , and ecstatically kissed her several times on her smiling lips . 
She seemed quite in love with her . 
`` This is the first time we 've met , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said rapturously . 
`` I wanted to know her , to see her . 
I wanted to go to her , but I 'd no sooner expressed the wish than she came to me . 
I knew we should settle everything together - everything . 
My heart told me so - I was begged not to take the step , but I foresaw it would be a way out of the difficulty , and I was not mistaken . 
Grushenka has explained everything to me , told me all she means to do . 
She flew here like an angel of goodness and brought us peace and joy . '' 
`` You did not disdain me , sweet , excellent young lady , '' drawled Grushenka in her singsong voice , still with the same charming smile of delight . 
`` Do n't dare to speak to me like that , you sorceress , you witch ! 
Disdain you ! 
Here , I must kiss your lower lip once more . 
It looks as though it were swollen , and now it will be more so , and more and more . 
Look how she laughs , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
