Alyosha made up his mind to wait . 
He felt that , perhaps , indeed , his work lay here . 
Mitya sank into thought for a moment , with his elbow on the table and his head in his hand . 
Both were silent . 
`` Alyosha , '' said Mitya , `` you 're the only one who wo n't laugh . 
I should like to begin - my confession - with Schiller 's Hymn to Joy , An die Freude ! 
I do n't know German , I only know it 's called that . 
Do n't think I 'm talking nonsense because I 'm drunk . 
I 'm not a bit drunk . 
Brandy 's all very well , but I need two bottles to make me drunk : Silenus with his rosy phiz Upon his stumbling ass . 
But I 've not drunk a quarter of a bottle , and I 'm not Silenus . 
I 'm not Silenus , though I am strong , * for I 've made a decision once for all . 
Forgive me the pun ; you 'll have to forgive me a lot more than puns to-day . 
Do n't be uneasy . 
I 'm not spinning it out . 
I 'm talking sense , and I 'll come to the point in a minute . 
I wo n't keep you in suspense . 
Stay , how does it go ? '' 
* In Russian , silen . 
He raised his head , thought a minute , and began with enthusiasm : Wild and fearful in his cavern Hid the naked troglodyte , And the homeless nomad wandered Laying waste the fertile plain . 
Menacing with spear and arrow In the woods the hunter strayed ... . 
Woe to all poor wretches stranded On those cruel and hostile shores ! 
From the peak of high Olympus Came the mother Ceres down , Seeking in those savage regions Her lost daughter Proserpine . 
But the Goddess found no refuge , Found no kindly welcome there , And no temple bearing witness To the worship of the gods . 
From the fields and from the vineyards Came no fruits to deck the feasts , Only flesh of bloodstained victims Smouldered on the altar-fires , And where'er the grieving goddess Turns her melancholy gaze , Sunk in vilest degradation Man his loathsomeness displays Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha 's hand . 
`` My dear , my dear , in degradation , in degradation now , too . 
There 's a terrible amount of suffering for man on earth , a terrible lot of trouble . 
Do n't think I 'm only a brute in an officer 's uniform , wallowing in dirt and drink . 
I hardly think of anything but of that degraded man - if only I 'm not lying . 
I pray God I 'm not lying and showing off . 
I think about that man because I am that man myself . 
Would he purge his soul from vileness And attain to light and worth , He must turn and cling for ever To his ancient Mother Earth . 
But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth . 
I do n't kiss her . 
I do n't cleave to her bosom . 
Am I to become a peasant or a shepherd ? 
I go on and I do n't know whether I 'm going to shame or to light and joy . 
That 's the trouble , for everything in the world is a riddle ! 
And whenever I 've happened to sink into the vilest degradation -LRB- and it 's always been happening -RRB- I always read that poem about Ceres and man . 
Has it reformed me ? 
Never ! 
For I 'm a Karamazov . 
For when I do leap into the pit , I go headlong with my heels up , and am pleased to be falling in that degrading attitude , and pride myself upon it . 
And in the very depths of that degradation I begin a hymn of praise . 
Let me be accursed . 
Let me be vile and base , only let me kiss the hem of the veil in which my God is shrouded . 
Though I may be following the devil , I am Thy son , O Lord , and I love Thee , and I feel the joy without which the world can not stand . 
Joy everlasting fostereth The soul of all creation , It is her secret ferment fires The cup of life with flame . 
'T is at her beck the grass hath turned Each blade towards the light And solar systems have evolved From chaos and dark night , Filling the realms of boundless space Beyond the sage 's sight . 
At bounteous Nature 's kindly breast , All things that breathe drink Joy , And birds and beasts and creeping things All follow where She leads . 
Her gifts to man are friends in need , The wreath , the foaming must , To angels - vision of God 's throne , To insects - sensual lust . 
But enough poetry ! 
I am in tears ; let me cry . 
It may be foolishness that everyone would laugh at . 
But you wo n't laugh . 
Your eyes are shining , too . 
Enough poetry . 
I want to tell you now about the insects to whom God gave ` sensual lust . ' 
To insects - sensual lust . 
I am that insect , brother , and it is said of me specially . 
All we Karamazovs are such insects , and , angel as you are , that insect lives in you , too , and will stir up a tempest in your blood . 
Tempests , because sensual lust is a tempest worse than a tempest ! 
Beauty is a terrible and awful thing ! 
It is terrible because it has not been fathomed and never can be fathomed , for God sets us nothing but riddles . 
Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by side . 
I am a cultivated man , brother , but I 've thought a lot about this . 
It 's terrible what mysteries there are ! 
Too many riddles weigh men down on earth . 
We must solve them as we can , and try to keep a dry skin in the water . 
Beauty ! 
I ca n't endure the thought that a man of lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of the Madonna and ends with the ideal of Sodom . 
What 's still more awful is that a man with the ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna , and his heart may be on fire with that ideal , genuinely on fire , just as in his days of youth and innocence . 
Yes , man is broad , too broad , indeed . 
I 'd have him narrower . 
The devil only knows what to make of it ! 
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart . 
Is there beauty in Sodom ? 
Believe me , that for the immense mass of mankind beauty is found in Sodom . 
Did you know that secret ? 
The awful thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible . 
God and the devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man . 
But a man always talks of his own ache . 
Listen , now to come to facts . '' 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - In Anecdote `` I was leading a wild life then . 
Father said just now that I spent several thousand roubles in seducing young girls . 
That 's a swinish invention , and there was nothing of the sort . 
And if there was , I did n't need money simply for that . 
With me money is an accessory , the overflow of my heart , the framework . 
To-day she would be my lady , to-morrow a wench out of the streets in her place . 
I entertained them both . 
I threw away money by the handful on music , rioting , and Gypsies . 
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies , too , for they 'll take it greedily , that must be admitted , and be pleased and thankful for it . 
Ladies used to be fond of me : not all of them , but it happened , it happened . 
But I always liked side-paths , little dark back-alleys behind the main road - there one finds adventures and surprises , and precious metal in the dirt . 
I am speaking figuratively , brother . 
In the town I was in , there were no such back-alleys in the literal sense , but morally there were . 
If you were like me , you 'd know what that means . 
I loved vice , I loved the ignominy of vice . 
I loved cruelty ; am I not a bug , am I not a noxious insect ? 
In fact a Karamazov ! 
