`` Very good , '' he commented at last . 
`` You see , I have n't jumped up , I have n't knocked you down , I have n't killed you . 
Speak on . 
So , according to you , I had fixed on Dmitri to do it ; I was reckoning on him ? '' 
`` How could you help reckoning on him ? 
If he killed him , then he would lose all the rights of a nobleman , his rank and property , and would go off to exile ; so his share of the inheritance would come to you and your brother Alexey Fyodorovitch in equal parts ; so you 'd each have not forty , but sixty thousand each . 
There 's not a doubt you did reckon on Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` What I put up with from you ! 
Listen , scoundrel , if I had reckoned on anyone then , it would have been on you , not on Dmitri , and I swear I did expect some wickedness from you ... at the time ... . 
I remember my impression ! 
`` I thought , too , for a minute , at the time , that you were reckoning on me as well , '' said Smerdyakov , with a sarcastic grin . 
`` So that it was just by that more than anything you showed me what was in your mind . 
For if you had a foreboding about me and yet went away , you as good as said to me , ` You can murder my parent , I wo n't hinder you ! '' ' 
`` You scoundrel ! 
So that 's how you understood it ! '' 
`` It was all that going to Tchermashnya . 
Why ! 
You were meaning to go to Moscow and refused all your father 's entreaties to go to Tchermashnya - and simply at a foolish word from me you consented at once ! 
What reason had you to consent to Tchermashnya ? 
Since you went to Tchermashnya with no reason , simply at my word , it shows that you must have expected something from me . '' 
No , I swear I did n't ! '' 
shouted Ivan , grinding his teeth . 
`` You did n't ? 
Then you ought , as your father 's son , to have had me taken to the lock-up and thrashed at once for my words then ... or at least , to have given me a punch in the face on the spot , but you were not a bit angry , if you please , and at once in a friendly way acted on my foolish word and went away , which was utterly absurd , for you ought to have stayed to save your parent 's life . 
How could I help drawing my conclusions ? '' 
Ivan sat scowling , both his fists convulsively pressed on his knees . 
`` Yes , I am sorry I did n't punch you in the face , '' he said with a bitter smile . 
`` I could n't have taken you to the lock-up just then . 
Who would have believed me and what charge could I bring against you ? 
But the punch in the face ... oh , I 'm sorry I did n't think of it . 
Though blows are forbidden , I should have pounded your ugly face to a jelly . '' 
Smerdyakov looked at him almost with relish . 
`` In the ordinary occasions of life , '' he said in the same complacent and sententious tone in which he had taunted Grigory and argued with him about religion at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's table , `` in the ordinary occasions of life , blows on the face are forbidden nowadays by law , and people have given them up , but in exceptional occasions of life people still fly to blows , not only among us but all over the world , be it even the fullest republic of France , just as in the time of Adam and Eve , and they never will leave off , but you , even in an exceptional case , did not dare . '' 
`` What are you learning French words for ? '' 
Ivan nodded towards the exercise-book lying on the table . 
`` Why should n't I learn them so as to improve my education , supposing that I may myself chance to go some day to those happy parts of Europe ? '' 
`` Listen , monster . '' 
Ivan 's eyes flashed and he trembled all over . 
`` I am not afraid of your accusations ; you can say what you like about me , and if I do n't beat you to death , it 's simply because I suspect you of that crime and I 'll drag you to justice . 
I 'll unmask you . '' 
`` To my thinking , you 'd better keep quiet , for what can you accuse me of , considering my absolute innocence ? 
And who would believe you ? 
Only if you begin , I shall tell everything , too , for I must defend myself . '' 
`` Do you think I am afraid of you now ? '' 
`` If the court does n't believe all I 've said to you just now , the public will , and you will be ashamed . '' 
`` That 's as much as to say , ` It 's always worth while speaking to a sensible man , ' eh ? '' 
snarled Ivan . 
`` You hit the mark , indeed . 
And you 'd better be sensible . '' 
Ivan got up , shaking all over with indignation , put on his coat , and without replying further to Smerdyakov , without even looking at him , walked quickly out of the cottage . 
The cool evening air refreshed him . 
There was a bright moon in the sky . 
A nightmare of ideas and sensations filled his soul . 
`` Shall I go at once and give information against Smerdyakov ? 
But what information can I give ? 
He is not guilty , anyway . 
On the contrary , he 'll accuse me . 
And in fact , why did I set off for Tchermashnya then ? 
What for ? 
What for ? '' 
Ivan asked himself . 
`` Yes , of course , I was expecting something and he is right ... '' And he remembered for the hundredth time how , on the last night in his father 's house , he had listened on the stairs . 
But he remembered it now with such anguish that he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed . 
`` Yes , I expected it then , that 's true ! 
I wanted the murder , I did want the murder ! 
Did I want the murder ? 
Did I want it ? 
I must kill Smerdyakov ! 
If I do n't dare kill Smerdyakov now , life is not worth living ! '' 
Ivan did not go home , but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmed her by his appearance . 
He was like a madman . 
He repeated all his conversation with Smerdyakov , every syllable of it . 
He could n't be calmed , however much she tried to soothe him : he kept walking about the room , speaking strangely , disconnectedly . 
At last he sat down , put his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strange sentence : `` If it 's not Dmitri , but Smerdyakov who 's the murderer , I share his guilt , for I put him up to it . 
Whether I did , I do n't know yet . 
But if he is the murderer , and not Dmitri , then , of course , I am the murderer , too . '' 
When Katerina Ivanovna heard that , she got up from her seat without a word , went to her writing-table , opened a box standing on it , took out a sheet of paper and laid it before Ivan . 
This was the document of which Ivan spoke to Alyosha later on as a `` conclusive proof '' that Dmitri had killed his father . 
It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna when he was drunk , on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads on the way to the monastery , after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's , when Grushenka had insulted her . 
Then , parting from Alyosha , Mitya had rushed to Grushenka . 
I do n't know whether he saw her , but in the evening he was at the Metropolis , where he got thoroughly drunk . 
Then he asked for pen and paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself . 
It was a wordy , disconnected , frantic letter , a drunken letter , in fact . 
It was like the talk of a drunken man , who , on his return home , begins with extraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he has just been insulted , what a rascal had just insulted him , what a fine fellow he is on the other hand , and how he will pay that scoundrel out ; and all that at great length , with great excitement and incoherence , with drunken tears and blows on the table . 
The letter was written on a dirty piece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind . 
It had been provided by the tavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it . 
There was evidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not only filled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest . 
The letter ran as follows : FATAL KATYA : To-morrow I will get the money and repay your three thousand and farewell , woman of great wrath , but farewell , too , my love ! 
Let us make an end ! 
To-morrow I shall try and get it from everyone , and if I ca n't borrow it , I give you my word of honour I shall go to my father and break his skull and take the money from under the pillow , if only Ivan has gone . 
It I have to go to Siberia for it , I 'll give you back your three thousand . 
And farewell . 
I bow down to the ground before you , for I 've been a scoundrel to you . 
Forgive me ! 
No , better not forgive me , you 'll be happier and so shall I ! 
Better Siberia than your love , for I love another woman and you got to know her too well to-day , so how can you forgive ? 
I will murder the man who 's robbed me ! 
I 'll leave you all and go to the East so as to see no one again . 
Not her either , for you are not my only tormentress ; she is too . 
Farewel ! 
