Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish ; she was probably , indeed , cleverer than her husband , or , at least , more prudent than he in worldly affairs , and yet she had given in to him in everything without question or complaint ever since her marriage , and respected him for his spiritual superiority . 
It was remarkable how little they spoke to one another in the course of their lives , and only of the most necessary daily affairs . 
The grave and dignified Grigory thought over all his cares and duties alone , so that Marfa Ignatyevna had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her advice . 
She felt that her husband respected her silence , and took it as a sign of her good sense . 
He had never beaten her but once , and then only slightly . 
Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch 's marriage with Adelaida Ivanovna , the village girls and women - at that time serfs - were called together before the house to sing and dance . 
They were beginning `` In the Green Meadows , '' when Marfa , at that time a young woman , skipped forward and danced `` the Russian Dance , '' not in the village fashion , but as she had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich Miusov family , in their private theatre , where the actors were taught to dance by a dancing master from Moscow . 
Grigory saw how his wife danced , and , an hour later , at home in their cottage he gave her a lesson , pulling her hair a little . 
But there it ended : the beating was never repeated , and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing . 
God had not blessed them with children . 
One child was born but it died . 
Grigory was fond of children , and was not ashamed of showing it . 
When Adelaida Ivanovna had run away , Grigory took Dmitri , then a child of three years old , combed his hair and washed him in a tub with his own hands , and looked after him for almost a year . 
Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha , for which the general 's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the face ; but I have already related all that . 
The only happiness his own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth . 
When it was born , he was overwhelmed with grief and horror . 
The baby had six fingers . 
Grigory was so crushed by this , that he was not only silent till the day of the christening , but kept away in the garden . 
It was spring , and he spent three days digging the kitchen garden . 
The third day was fixed for christening the baby : meantime Grigory had reached a conclusion . 
Going into the cottage where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived , including Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was to stand godfather , he suddenly announced that the baby `` ought not to be christened at all . '' 
He announced this quietly , briefly , forcing out his words , and gazing with dull intentness at the priest . 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the priest with good-humoured surprise . 
`` Because it 's a dragon , '' muttered Grigory . 
`` A dragon ? 
What dragon ? '' 
Grigory did not speak for some time . 
`` It 's a confusion of nature , '' he muttered vaguely , but firmly , and obviously unwilling to say more . 
They laughed , and , of course , christened the poor baby . 
Grigory prayed earnestly at the font , but his opinion of the new-born child remained unchanged . 
Yet he did not interfere in any way . 
As long as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it , tried indeed not to notice it , and for the most part kept out of the cottage . 
But when , at the end of a fortnight , the baby died of thrush , he himself laid the child in its little coffin , looked at it in profound grief , and when they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and bowed down to the earth . 
He did not for years afterwards mention his child , nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him , and , even if Grigory were not present , she never spoke of it above a whisper . 
Marfa observed that , from the day of the burial , he devoted himself to `` religion , '' and took to reading the Lives of the Saints , for the most part sitting alone and in silence , and always putting on his big , round , silver-rimmed spectacles . 
He rarely read aloud , only perhaps in Lent . 
He was fond of the Book of Job , and had somehow got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of `` the God fearing Father Isaac the Syrian , which he read persistently for years together , understanding very little of it , but perhaps prizing and loving it the more for that . 
Of late he had begun to listen to the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighbourhood . 
He was evidently shaken by them , but judged it unfitting to go over to the new faith . 
His habit of theological reading gave him an expression of still greater gravity . 
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism . 
And the birth of his deformed child , and its death , had , as though by special design , been accompanied by another strange and marvellous event , which , as he said later , had left a `` stamp '' upon his soul . 
It happened that , on the very night after the burial of his child , Marfa was awakened by the wail of a new-born baby . 
She was frightened and waked her husband . 
He listened and said he thought it was more like someone groaning , `` it might be a woman . '' 
He got up and dressed . 
It was a rather warm night in May . 
As he went down the steps , he distinctly heard groans coming from the garden . 
But the gate from the yard into the garden was locked at night , and there was no other way of entering it , for it was enclosed all round by a strong , high fence . 
Going back into the house , Grigory lighted a lantern , took the garden key , and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of his wife , who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying , and that it was her own baby crying and calling for her , went into the garden in silence . 
There he heard at once that the groans came from the bath-house that stood near the garden gate , and that they were the groans of a woman . 
Opening the door of the bath-house , he saw a sight which petrified him . 
An idiot girl , who wandered about the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya -LRB- Stinking Lizaveta -RRB- , had got into the bath-house and had just given birth to a child . 
She lay dying with the baby beside her . 
She said nothing , for she had never been able to speak . 
But her story needs a chapter to itself . 
Lizaveta THERE was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly , and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion . 
This Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature , `` not five foot within a wee bit , '' as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her , after her death . 
Her broad , healthy , red face had a look of blank idiocy and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant , in spite of their meek expression . 
She wandered about , summer and winter alike , barefooted , wearing nothing but a hempen smock . 
Her coarse , almost black hair curled like lamb 's wool , and formed a sort of huge cap on her head . 
It was always crusted with mud , and had leaves ; bits of stick , and shavings clinging to it , as she always slept on the ground and in the dirt . 
Her father , a homeless , sickly drunkard , called Ilya , had lost everything and lived many years as a workman with some well-to-do tradespeople . 
Her mother had long been dead . 
Spiteful and diseased , Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever she returned to him . 
But she rarely did so , for everyone in the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot , and so specially dear to God . 
Ilya 's employers , and many others in the town , especially of the tradespeople , tried to clothe her better , and always rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter . 
But , although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting , she usually went away , preferably to the cathedral porch , and taking off all that had been given her - kerchief , sheepskin , skirt or boots - she left them there and walked away barefoot in her smock as before . 
It happened on one occasion that a new governor of the province , making a tour of inspection in our town , saw Lizaveta , and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities . 
And though he was told she was an idiot , he pronounced that for a young woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a breach of the proprieties , and must not occur again . 
But the governor went his way , and Lizaveta was left as she was . 
At last her father died , which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of the religious persons of the town , as an orphan . 
In fact , everyone seemed to like her ; even the boys did not tease her , and the boys of our town , especially the schoolboys , are a mischievous set . 
She would walk into strange houses , and no one drove her away . 
Everyone was kind to her and gave her something . 
If she were given a copper , she would take it , and at once drop it in the alms-jug of the church or prison . 
If she were given a roll or bun in the market , she would hand it to the first child she met . 
Sometimes she would stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her , and the lady would be pleased to take it . 
She herself never tasted anything but black bread and water . 
If she went into an expensive shop , where there were costly goods or money lying about , no one kept watch on her , for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles overlooked by them , she would not have touched a farthing . 
She scarcely ever went to church . 
She slept either in the church porch or climbed over a hurdle -LRB- there are many hurdles instead of fences to this day in our town -RRB- into a kitchen garden . 
She used at least once a week to turn up `` at home , '' that is at the house of her father 's former employers , and in the winter went there every night , and slept either in the passage or the cow-house . 
People were amazed that she could stand such a life , but she was accustomed to it , and , although she was so tiny , she was of a robust constitution . 
Some of the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride , but that is hardly credible . 
She could hardly speak , and only from time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt . 
How could she have been proud ? 
It happened one clear , warm , moonlight night in September -LRB- many years ago -RRB- five or six drunken revellers were returning from the club at a very late hour , according to our provincial notions . 
They passed through the `` backway , '' which led between the back gardens of the houses , with hurdles on either side . 
This way leads out on to the bridge over the long , stinking pool which we were accustomed to call a river . 
Among the nettles and burdocks under the hurdle our revellers saw Lizaveta asleep . 
They stopped to look at her , laughing , and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness . 
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry whether anyone could possibly look upon such an animal as a woman , and so forth ... . 
They all pronounced with lofty repugnance that it was impossible . 
But Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was among them , sprang forward and declared that it was by no means impossible , and that , indeed , there was a certain piquancy about it , and so on ... . 
It is true that at that time he was overdoing his part as a buffoon . 
He liked to put himself forward and entertain the company , ostensibly on equal terms , of course , though in reality he was on a servile footing with them . 
It was just at the time when he had received the news of his first wife 's death in Petersburg , and , with crape upon his hat , was drinking and behaving so shamelessly that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of him . 
The revellers , of course , laughed at this unexpected opinion ; and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it . 
