Rakitin and Alyosha saw him running . 
He was in such a hurry that in his impatience he put his foot on the step on which Ivan 's left foot was still resting , and clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in . 
`` I am going with you ! '' 
he kept shouting , laughing a thin mirthful laugh with a look of reckless glee in his face . 
`` Take me , too . '' 
`` There ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , delighted . 
`` Did I not say he was von Sohn . 
It is von Sohn himself , risen from the dead . 
Why , how did you tear yourself away ? 
What did you von Sohn there ? 
And how could you get away from the dinner ? 
You must be a brazen-faced fellow ! 
I am that myself , but I am surprised at you , brother ! 
Jump in , jump in ! 
Let him pass , Ivan . 
It will be fun . 
He can lie somewhere at our feet . 
Will you lie at our feet , von Sohn ? 
Or perch on the box with the coachman . 
Skip on to the box , von Sohn ! '' 
But Ivan , who had by now taken his seat , without a word gave Maximov a violent punch in the breast and sent him flying . 
It was quite by chance he did not fall . 
`` Drive on ! '' 
Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman . 
`` Why , what are you doing , what are you about ? 
Why did you do that ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch protested . 
But the carriage had already driven away . 
Ivan made no reply . 
`` Well , you are a fellow , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said again . 
After a pause of two minutes , looking askance at his son , `` Why , it was you got up all this monastery business . 
You urged it , you approved of it . 
Why are you angry now ? '' 
`` You 've talked rot enough . 
You might rest a bit now , '' Ivan snapped sullenly . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes . 
`` A drop of brandy would be nice now , '' he observed sententiously , but Ivan made no response . 
`` You shall have some , too , when we get home . '' 
Ivan was still silent . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes . 
`` But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery , though you will dislike it so much , most honoured Karl von Moor . '' 
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously , and turning away stared at the road . 
And they did not speak again all the way home . 
The Sensualists In the Servants ' Quarters THE Karamazovs ' house was far from being in the centre of the town , but it was not quite outside it . 
It was a pleasant-looking old house of two stories , painted grey , with a red iron roof . 
It was roomy and snug , and might still last many years . 
There were all sorts of unexpected little cupboards and closets and staircases . 
There were rats in it , but Fyodor Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike them . 
`` One does n't feel so solitary when one 's left alone in the evening , '' he used to say . 
It was his habit to send the servants away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up alone . 
The lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to have the cooking done there , although there was a kitchen in the house ; he did not like the smell of cooking , and , winter and summer alike , the dishes were carried in across the courtyard . 
The house was built for a large family ; there was room for five times as many , with their servants . 
But at the time of our story there was no one living in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son Ivan . 
And in the lodge there were only three servants : old Grigory , and his old wife Marfa , and a young man called Smerdyakov . 
Of these three we must say a few words . 
Of old Grigory we have said something already . 
He was firm and determined and went blindly and obstinately for his object , if once be had been brought by any reasons -LRB- and they were often very illogical ones -RRB- to believe that it was immutably right . 
He was honest and incorruptible . 
His wife , Marfa Ignatyevna , had obeyed her husband 's will implicitly all her life , yet she had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the serfs . 
She was set on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little shop in Moscow with their small savings . 
But Grigory decided then , once for all , that `` the woman 's talking nonsense , for every woman is dishonest , '' and that they ought not to leave their old master , whatever he might be , for `` that was now their duty . '' 
`` Do you understand what duty is ? '' 
he asked Marfa Ignatyevna . 
`` I understand what duty means , Grigory Vassilyevitch , but why it 's our duty to stay here I never shall understand , '' Marfa answered firmly . 
`` Well , do n't understand then . 
But so it shall be . 
And you hold your tongue . '' 
And so it was . 
They did not go away , and Fyodor Pavlovitch promised them a small sum for wages , and paid it regularly . 
Grigory knew , too , that he had an indisputable influence over his master . 
It was true , and he was aware of it . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was an obstinate and cunning buffoon , yet , though his will was strong enough `` in some of the affairs of life , '' as he expressed it , he found himself , to his surprise , extremely feeble in facing certain other emergencies . 
He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of them . 
There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp lookout . 
And that 's not easy without a trustworthy man , and Grigory was a most trustworthy man . 
Many times in the course of his life Fyodor Pavlovitch had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory 's intervention , and on each occasion the old servant gave him a good lecture . 
But it was n't only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch was afraid of . 
There were graver occasions , and very subtle and complicated ones , when Fyodor Pavlovitch could not have explained the extraordinary craving for someone faithful and devoted , which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a moment . 
It was almost a morbid condition . 
Corrupt and often cruel in his lust , like some noxious insect , Fyodor Pavlovitch was sometimes , in moments of drunkenness , overcome by superstitious terror and a moral convulsion which took an almost physical form . 
`` My soul 's simply quaking in my throat at those times , '' he used to say . 
At such moments he liked to feel that there was near at hand , in the lodge if not in the room , a strong , faithful man , virtuous and unlike himself , who had seen all his debauchery and knew all his secrets , but was ready in his devotion to overlook all that , not to oppose him , above all , not to reproach him or threaten him with anything , either in this world or in the next , and , in case of need , to defend him - from whom ? 
From somebody unknown , but terrible and dangerous . 
What he needed was to feel that there was another man , an old and tried friend , that he might call him in his sick moments merely to look at his face , or , perhaps , exchange some quite irrelevant words with him . 
And if the old servant were not angry , he felt comforted , and if he were angry , he was more dejected . 
It happened even -LRB- very rarely however -RRB- that Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and fetch him for a moment . 
When the old man came , Fyodor Pavlovitch would begin talking about the most trivial matters , and would soon let him go again , sometimes even with a jest . 
And after he had gone , Fyodor Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and sleep the sleep of the just . 
Something of the same sort had happened to Fyodor Pavlovitch on Alyosha 's arrival . 
Alyosha `` pierced his heart '' by `` living with him , seeing everything and blaming nothing . '' 
Moreover , Alyosha brought with him something his father had never known before : a complete absence of contempt for him and an invariable kindness , a perfectly natural unaffected devotion to the old man who deserved it so little . 
All this was a complete surprise to the old profligate , who had dropped all family ties . 
It was a new and surprising experience for him , who had till then loved nothing but `` evil . '' 
When Alyosha had left him , he confessed to himself that he had learnt something he had not till then been willing to learn . 
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaida Ivanovna , the first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of Dmitri , and that he had , on the contrary , protected Sofya Ivanovna , the poor `` crazy woman , '' against his master and anyone who chanced to speak ill or lightly of her . 
His sympathy for the unhappy wife had become something sacred to him , so that even now , twenty years after , he could not bear a slighting allusion to her from anyone , and would at once check the offender . 
Externally , Grigory was cold , dignified and taciturn , and spoke , weighing his words , without frivolity . 
It was impossible to tell at first sight whether he loved his meek , obedient wife ; but he really did love her , and she knew it . 
