He must have been with the Jesuits , somewhere , Ivan . 
Oh , you stinking Jesuit , who taught you ? 
But you 're talking nonsense , you casuist , nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Do n't cry , Grigory , we 'll reduce him to smoke and ashes in a moment . 
Tell me this , O ass ; you may be right before your enemies , but you have renounced your faith all the same in your own heart , and you say yourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed . 
And if once you 're anathema they wo n't pat you on the head for it in hell . 
What do you say to that , my fine Jesuit ? '' 
`` There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart , but there no special sin in that . 
Or if there was sin , it was the most ordinary . '' 
`` How 's that the most ordinary ? '' 
`` You lie , accursed one ! '' 
hissed Grigory . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' Smerdyakov went on , staid and unruffled , conscious of his triumph , but , as it were , generous to the vanquished foe . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch ; it is said in the Scripture that if you have faith , even as a mustard seed , and bid a mountain move into the sea , it will move without the least delay at your bidding . 
Well , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if I 'm without faith and you have so great a faith that you are continually swearing at me , you try yourself telling this mountain , not to move into the sea for that 's a long way off , but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of the garden . 
You 'll see for yourself that it wo n't budge , but will remain just where it is however much you shout at it , and that shows , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that you have n't faith in the proper manner , and only abuse others about it . 
Again , taking into consideration that no one in our day , not only you , but actually no one , from the highest person to the lowest peasant , can shove mountains into the sea - except perhaps some one man in the world , or , at most , two , and they most likely are saving their souls in secret somewhere in the Egyptian desert , so you would n't find them - if so it be , if all the rest have no faith , will God curse all the rest ? 
that is , the population of the whole earth , except about two hermits in the desert , and in His well-known mercy will He not forgive one of them ? 
And so I 'm persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgiven if I shed tears of repentance . '' 
`` Stay ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , in a transport of delight . 
`` So you do suppose there are two who can move mountains ? 
Ivan , make a note of it , write it down . 
There you have the Russian all over ! '' 
`` You 're quite right in saying it 's characteristic of the people 's faith , '' Ivan assented , with an approving smile . 
`` You agree . 
Then it must be so , if you agree . 
It 's true , is n't it Alyosha ? 
That 's the Russian faith all over , is n't it ? '' 
`` No , Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all , '' said Alyosha firmly and gravely . 
`` I 'm not talking about his faith . 
I mean those two in the desert , only that idea . 
Surely that 's Russian , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's purely Russian , '' said Alyosha smiling . 
`` Your words are worth a gold piece , O ass , and I 'll give it to you to-day . 
But as to the rest you talk nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Let me tell you , stupid , that we here are all of little faith , only from carelessness , because we have n't time ; things are too much for us , and , in the second place , the Lord God has given us so little time , only twenty-four hours in the day , so that one has n't even time to get sleep enough , much less to repent of one 's sins . 
While you have denied your faith to your enemies when you 'd nothing else to think about but to show your faith ! 
So I consider , brother , that it constitutes a sin . '' 
`` Constitute a sin it may , but consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that it only extenuates it , if it does constitute . 
If I had believed then in very truth , as I ought to have believed , then it really would have been sinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith , and had gone over to the pagan Mohammedan faith . 
But , of course , it would n't have come to torture then , because I should only have had to say at that instant to the mountain , ` Move and crush the tormentor , ' and it would have moved and at the very instant have crushed him like a black-beetle , and I should have walked away as though nothing had happened , praising and glorifying God . 
But , suppose at that very moment I had tried all that , and cried to that mountain , ` Crush these tormentors , ' and it had n't crushed them , how could I have helped doubting , pray , at such a time , and at such a dread hour of mortal terror ? 
And apart from that , I should know already that I could not attain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven -LRB- for since the mountain had not moved at my word , they could not think very much of my faith up aloft , and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world to come -RRB- . 
So why should I let them flay the skin off me as well , and to no good purpose ? 
For , even though they had flayed my skin half off my back , even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry . 
And at such a moment not only doubt might come over one but one might lose one 's reason from fear , so that one would not be able to think at all . 
And , therefore , how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing my advantage or reward there or here , I should , at least , save my skin . 
And so trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope that I might be altogether forgiven . '' 
Over the Brandy THE controversy was over . 
But , strange to say , Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had been so gay , suddenly began frowning . 
He frowned and gulped brandy , and it was already a glass too much . 
`` Get along with you , Jesuits ! '' 
he cried to the servants . 
`` Go away , Smerdyakov . 
I 'll send you the gold piece I promised you to-day , but be off ! 
Do n't cry , Grigory . 
Go to Marfa . 
She 'll comfort you and put you to bed . 
The rascals wo n't let us sit in peace after dinner , '' he snapped peevishly , as the servants promptly withdrew at his word . 
`` Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now , after dinner . 
It 's you he 's so interested in . 
What have you done to fascinate him ? '' 
he added to Ivan . 
`` Nothing whatever , '' answered Ivan . 
`` He 's pleased to have a high opinion of me ; he 's a lackey and a mean soul . 
Raw material for revolution , however , when the time comes . '' 
`` There will be others and better ones . 
But there will be some like him as well . 
His kind will come first , and better ones after . '' 
`` And when will the time come ? '' 
`` The rocket will go off and fizzle out , perhaps . 
The peasants are not very fond of listening to these soup-makers , so far . '' 
`` Ah , brother , but a Balaam 's ass like that thinks and thinks , and the devil knows where he gets to . '' 
`` He 's storing up ideas , '' said Ivan , smiling . 
`` You see , I know he ca n't bear me , nor anyone else , even you , though you fancy that he has a high opinion of you . 
Worse still with Alyosha , he despises Alyosha . 
But he does n't steal , that 's one thing , and he 's not a gossip , he holds his tongue , and does n't wash our dirty linen in public . 
He makes capital fish pasties too . 
But , damn him , is he worth talking about so much ? '' 
`` Of course he is n't . '' 
`` And as for the ideas he may be hatching , the Russian peasant , generally speaking , needs thrashing . 
That I 've always maintained . 
Our peasants are swindlers , and do n't deserve to be pitied , and it 's a good thing they 're still flogged sometimes . 
Russia is rich in birches . 
If they destroyed the forests , it would be the ruin of Russia . 
I stand up for the clever people . 
We 've left off thrashing the peasants , we 've grown so clever , but they go on thrashing themselves . 
And a good thing too . 
` For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again , ' or how does it go ? 
Anyhow , it will be measured . 
But Russia 's all swinishness . 
My dear , if you only knew how I hate Russia ... . 
That is , not Russia , but all this vice ! 
But maybe I mean Russia . 
Tout cela c'est de la cochonnerie ... * Do you know what I like ? 
I like wit . '' 
* All this is filthiness . 
`` You 've had another glass . 
That 's enough . '' 
