The paper began coming out this year . 
I am awfully fond of gossip , and I take it in , and now it pays me out - this is what gossip comes to ! 
Here it is , here , this passage . 
Read it . '' 
And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under her pillow . 
It was not exactly that she was upset , she seemed overwhelmed and perhaps everything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head . 
The paragraph was very typical , and must have been a great shock to her , but , fortunately perhaps , she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at that moment , and so might race off in a minute to something else and quite forget the newspaper . 
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread all over Russia . 
And , good heavens ! 
what wild rumours about his brother , about the Karamazovs , and about himself he had read in the course of those two months , among other equally credible items ! 
One paper had even stated that he had gone into a monastery and become a monk , in horror at his brother 's crime . 
Another contradicted this , and stated that he and his elder , Father Zossima , had broken into the monastery chest and `` made tracks from the monastery . '' 
The present paragraph in the paper Gossip was under the heading , `` The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk . '' 
-LRB- That , alas ! 
was the name of our little town . 
I had hitherto kept it concealed . -RRB- 
It was brief , and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it . 
No names appeared , in fact . 
It was merely stated that the criminal , whose approaching trial was making such a sensation - retired army captain , an idle swaggerer , and reactionary bully - was continually involved in amorous intrigues , and particularly popular with certain ladies `` who were pining in solitude . '' 
One such lady , a pining widow , who tried to seem young though she had a grown-up daughter , was so fascinated by him that only two hours before the crime she offered him three thousand roubles , on condition that he would elope with her to the gold mines . 
But the criminal , counting on escaping punishment , had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousand rather than go off to Siberia with the middle-aged charms of his pining lady . 
This playful paragraph finished , of course , with an outburst of generous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the lately abolished institution of serfdom . 
Reading it with curiosity , Alyosha folded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Well , that must be me , '' she hurried on again . 
`` Of course I am meant . 
Scarcely more than an hour before , I suggested gold mines to him , and here they talk of ` middle-aged charms ' as though that were my motive ! 
He writes that out of spite ! 
God Almighty forgive him for the middle-aged charms , as I forgive him ! 
You know it 's - Do you know who it is ? 
It 's your friend Rakitin . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' said Alyosha , `` though I 've heard nothing about it . '' 
`` It 's he , it 's he ! 
No ` perhaps ' about it . 
You know I turned him out of the house ... . 
You know all that story , do n't you ? '' 
`` I know that you asked him not to visit you for the future , but why it was , I have n't heard ... from you , at least . '' 
`` Ah , then you 've heard it from him ! 
He abuses me , I suppose , abuses me dreadfully ? '' 
`` Yes , he does ; but then he abuses everyone . 
But why you 've given him up I , have n't heard from him either . 
I meet him very seldom now , indeed . 
We are not friends . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll tell you all about it . 
There 's no help for it , I 'll confess , for there is one point in which I was perhaps to blame . 
Only a little , little point , so little that perhaps it does n't count . 
You see , my dear boy '' - Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming , though enigmatic , smile played about her lips - `` you see , I suspect ... You must forgive me , Alyosha . 
I am like a mother to you ... No , no ; quite the contrary . 
I speak to you now as though you were my father - mother 's quite out of place . 
Well , it 's as though I were confessing to Father Zossima , that 's just it . 
I called you a monk just now . 
Well , that poor young man , your friend , Rakitin -LRB- Mercy on us ! 
I ca n't be angry with him . 
I feel cross , but not very -RRB- , that frivolous young man , would you believe it , seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me . 
I only noticed it later . 
At first - a month ago - he only began to come oftener to see me , almost every day ; though , of course , we were acquainted before . 
I knew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me , and I began to notice things with surprise . 
You know , two months ago , that modest , charming , excellent young man , Ilyitch Perhotin , who 's in the service here , began to be a regular visitor at the house . 
You met him here ever so many times yourself . 
And he is an excellent , earnest young man , is n't he ? 
He comes once every three days , not every day -LRB- though I should be glad to see him every day -RRB- , and always so well dressed . 
Altogether , I love young people , Alyosha , talented , modest , like you , and he has almost the mind of a statesman , he talks so charmingly , and I shall certainly , certainly try and get promotion for him . 
He is a future diplomat . 
On that awful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night . 
And your friend Rakitin comes in such boots , and always stretches them out on the carpet ... . 
He began hinting at his feelings , in fact , and one day , as he was going , he squeezed my hand terribly hard . 
My foot began to swell directly after he pressed my hand like that . 
He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here before , and would you believe it , he is always gibing at him , growling at him , for some reason . 
I simply looked at the way they went on together and laughed inwardly . 
So I was sitting here alone - no , I was laid up then . 
Well , I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in , and only fancy ! 
brought me some verses of his own composition - a short poem , on my bad foot : that is , he described my foot in a poem . 
Wait a minute - how did it go ? 
A captivating little foot . 
It began somehow like that . 
I can never remember poetry . 
I 've got it here . 
I 'll show it to you later . 
But it 's a charming thing - charming ; and , you know , it 's not only about the foot , it had a good moral , too , a charming idea , only I 've forgotten it ; in fact , it was just the thing for an album . 
So , of course , I thanked him , and he was evidently flattered . 
I 'd hardly had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch , and Rakitin suddenly looked as black as night . 
I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way , for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses . 
I had a presentiment of it ; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in . 
I showed Pyotr Ilyitch the verses and did n't say who was the author . 
But I am convinced that he guessed , though he wo n't own it to this day , and declares he had no idea . 
But he says that on purpose . 
Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at once , and fell to criticising it . 
` Wretched doggerel , ' he said they were , ` some divinity student must have written them , ' and with such vehemence , such vehemence ! 
Then , instead of laughing , your friend flew into a rage . 
` Good gracious ! ' 
I thought , ` they 'll fly at each other . ' 
` It was I who wrote them , ' said he . ' 
I wrote them as a joke , ' he said , ` for I think it degrading to write verses ... . 
But they are good poetry . 
They want to put a monument to your Pushkin for writing about women 's feet , while I wrote with a moral purpose , and you , ' said he , ` are an advocate of serfdom . 
You 've no humane ideas , ' said he . 
` You have no modern enlightened feelings , you are uninfluenced by progress , you are a mere official , ' he said , ` and you take bribes . ' 
Then I began screaming and imploring them . 
And , you know , Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward . 
He at once took up the most gentlemanly tone , looked at him sarcastically , listened , and apologised . 
` I 'd no idea , ' said he . ' 
