Besides , I 'll get my daughters up for nothing , let alone a sum like that . 
They 've only just gone to bed , I 'll give them a kick and set them singing for you . 
You gave the peasants champagne to drink the other day , e-ech ! '' 
For all his pretended compassion for Mitya , Trifon Borissovitch had hidden half a dozen bottles of champagne on that last occasion , and had picked up a hundred-rouble note under the table , and it had remained in his clutches . 
`` Trifon Borissovitch , I sent more than one thousand flying last time I was here . 
Do you remember ? '' 
`` You did send it flying . 
I may well remember . 
You must have left three thousand behind you . '' 
`` Well , I 've come to do the same again , do you see ? '' 
And he pulled out his roll of notes , and held them up before the innkeeper 's nose . 
Now , listen and remember . 
In an hour 's time the wine will arrive , savouries , pies , and sweets - bring them all up at once . 
That box Andrey has got is to be brought up at once , too . 
Open it , and hand champagne immediately . 
And the girls , we must have the girls , Marya especially . '' 
He turned to the cart and pulled out the box of pistols . 
`` Here , Andrey , let 's settle . 
Here 's fifteen roubles for the drive , and fifty for vodka ... for your readiness , for your love ... . 
Remember Karamazov ! '' 
`` I 'm afraid , sir , '' Andrey . 
`` Give me five roubles extra , but more I wo n't take . 
Trifon Borissovitch , bear witness . 
Forgive my foolish words ... '' `` What are you afraid of ? '' 
asked Mitya , scanning him . 
`` Well , go to the devil , if that 's it ? '' 
he cried , flinging him five roubles . 
`` Now , Trifon Borissovitch , take me up quietly and let me first get a look at them , so that they do n't see me . 
Where are they ? 
In the blue room ? '' 
Trifon Borissovitch looked apprehensively at Mitya , but at once obediently did his bidding . 
Leading him into the passage , he went himself into the first large room , adjoining that in which the visitors were sitting , and took the light away . 
Then he stealthily led Mitya in , and put him in a corner in the dark , whence he could freely watch the company without being seen . 
But Mitya did not look long , and , indeed , he could not see them ; he saw her , his heart throbbed violently , and all was dark before his eyes . 
She was sitting sideways to the table in a low chair , and beside her , on the sofa , was the pretty youth , Kalganov . 
She was holding his hand and seemed to be laughing , while he , seeming vexed and not looking at her , was saying something in a loud voice to Maximov , who sat the other side of the table , facing Grushenka . 
Maximov was laughing violently at something . 
On the sofa sat he , and on a chair by the sofa there was another stranger . 
The one on the sofa was lolling backwards , smoking a pipe , and Mitya had an impression of a stoutish , broad-faced , short little man , who was apparently angry about something . 
His friend , the other stranger , struck Mitya as extraordinarily tall , but he could make out nothing more . 
He caught his breath . 
He could not bear it for a minute , he put the pistol-case on a chest , and with a throbbing heart he walked , feeling cold all over , straight into the blue room to face the company . 
`` Aie ! '' 
shrieked Grushenka , the first to notice him . 
The First and Rightful Lover WITH his long , rapid strides , Mitya walked straight up to the table . 
`` Gentlemen , '' he said in a loud voice , almost shouting , yet stammering at every word , `` I. . . 
I 'm all right ! 
Do n't be afraid ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` I - there 's nothing the matter , '' he turned suddenly to Grushenka , who had shrunk back in her chair towards Kalganov , and clasped his hand tightly . 
`` I. . . 
I 'm coming , too . 
I 'm here till morning . 
Gentlemen , may I stay with you till morning ? 
Only till morning , for the last time , in this same room ? '' 
So he finished , turning to the fat little man , with the pipe , sitting on the sofa . 
The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity and observed severely : `` Panie , * we 're here in private . 
There are other rooms . '' 
* Pan and Panie mean Mr. in Polish . 
Pani means Mrs. , Panovie , gentlemen . 
`` Why , it 's you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
answered Kalgonov suddenly . 
`` Sit down with us . 
How are you ? '' 
`` Delighted to see you , dear ... and precious fellow , I always thought a lot of you . '' 
Mitya responded , joyfully and eagerly , at once holding out his hand across the table . 
`` Aie ! 
How tight you squeeze ! 
You 've quite broken my fingers , '' laughed Kalganov . 
`` He always squeezes like that , always , '' Grushenka put in gaily , with a timid smile , seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya 's face that he was not going to make a scene . 
She was watching him with intense curiosity and still some uneasiness . 
She was impressed by something about him , and indeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in and speak like this at such a moment . 
`` Good evening , '' Maximov ventured blandly on the left . 
Mitya rushed up to him , too . 
`` Good evening . 
You 're here , too ! 
How glad I am to find you here , too ! 
Gentlemen , gentlemen , I - '' -LRB- He addressed the Polish gentleman with the pipe again , evidently taking him for the most important person present . -RRB- 
`` I flew here ... . 
I wanted to spend my last day , my last hour in this room , in this very room ... where I , too , adored ... my queen ... . 
Forgive me , Panie , '' he cried wildly , `` I flew here and vowed - Oh , do n't be afraid , it 's my last night ! 
Let 's drink to our good understanding . 
They 'll bring the wine at once ... . 
I brought this with me . '' 
-LRB- Something made him pull out his bundle of notes . -RRB- 
`` Allow me , panie ! 
I want to have music , singing , a revel , as we had before . 
But the worm , the unnecessary worm , will crawl away , and there 'll be no more of him . 
I will commemorate my day of joy on my last night . '' 
He was almost choking . 
There was so much , so much he wanted to say , but strange exclamations were all that came from his lips . 
The Pole gazed fixedly at him , at the bundle of notes in his hand ; looked at Grushenka , and was in evident perplexity . 
`` If my suverin lady is permitting - '' he was beginning . 
`` What does ` suverin ' mean ? 
` Sovereign , ' I suppose ? '' 
interrupted Grushenka . 
`` I ca n't help laughing at you , the way you talk . 
Sit down , Mitya , what are you talking about ? 
Do n't frighten us , please . 
You wo n't frighten us , will you ? 
