The old man knew that the elder Zossima , who was living in the monastery hermitage , had made a special impression upon his `` gentle boy . '' 
`` That is the most honest monk among them , of course , '' he observed , after listening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha , and seeming scarcely surprised at his request . 
`` H 'm ! 
... So that 's where you want to be , my gentle boy ? '' 
He was half drunk , and suddenly he grinned his slow half-drunken grin , which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy slyness . 
`` H 'm ! 
... I had a presentiment that you would end in something like this . 
Would you believe it ? 
You were making straight for it . 
Well , to be sure you have your own two thousand . 
That 's a dowry for you . 
And I 'll never desert you , my angel . 
And I 'll pay what 's wanted for you there , if they ask for it . 
But , of course , if they do n't ask , why should we worry them ? 
What do you say ? 
You know , you spend money like a canary , two grains a week . 
H 'm ! 
... Do you know that near one monastery there 's a place outside the town where every baby knows there are none but ` the monks ' wives ' living , as they are called . 
Thirty women , I believe . 
I have been there myself . 
You know , it 's interesting in its way , of course , as a variety . 
The worst of it is it 's awfully Russian . 
There are no French women there . 
Of course , they could get them fast enough , they have plenty of money . 
If they get to hear of it they 'll come along . 
Well , there 's nothing of that sort here , no ` monks ' wives , ' and two hundred monks . 
They 're honest . 
They keep the fasts . 
I admit it ... . 
H 'm ... . 
So you want to be a monk ? 
And do you know I 'm sorry to lose you , Alyosha ; would you believe it , I 've really grown fond of you ? 
Well , it 's a good opportunity . 
You 'll pray for us sinners ; we have sinned too much here . 
I 've always been thinking who would pray for me , and whether there 's anyone in the world to do it . 
My dear boy , I 'm awfully stupid about that . 
You would n't believe it . 
Awfully . 
You see , however stupid I am about it , I keep thinking , I keep thinking - from time to time , of course , not all the while . 
It 's impossible , I think , for the devils to forget to drag me down to hell with their hooks when I die . 
Then I wonder - hooks ? 
Where would they get them ? 
What of ? 
Iron hooks ? 
Where do they forge them ? 
Have they a foundry there of some sort ? 
The monks in the monastery probably believe that there 's a ceiling in hell , for instance . 
Now I 'm ready to believe in hell , but without a ceiling . 
It makes it more refined , more enlightened , more Lutheran that is . 
And , after all , what does it matter whether it has a ceiling or has n't ? 
But , do you know , there 's a damnable question involved in it ? 
If there 's no ceiling there can be no hooks , and if there are no hooks it all breaks down , which is unlikely again , for then there would be none to drag me down to hell , and if they do n't drag me down what justice is there in the world ? 
Il faudrait les inventer , * those hooks , on purpose for me alone , for , if you only knew , Alyosha , what a black-guard I am . '' 
* It would be neccessary to invent them . 
`` But there are no hooks there , '' said Alyosha , looking gently and seriously at his father . 
`` Yes , yes , only the shadows of hooks . 
I know , I know . 
That 's how a Frenchman described hell : ` J'ai vu l'ombre d'un cocher qui avec l'ombre d'une brosse frottait l'ombre d'une carrosse . ' 
* How do you know there are no hooks , darling ? 
When you 've lived with the monks you 'll sing a different tune . 
But go and get at the truth there , and then come and tell me . 
Anyway it 's easier going to the other world if one knows what there is there . 
Besides , it will be more seemly for you with the monks than here with me , with a drunken old man and young harlots ... though you 're like an angel , nothing touches you . 
And I dare say nothing will touch you there . 
That 's why I let you go , because I hope for that . 
You 've got all your wits about you . 
You will burn and you will burn out ; you will be healed and come back again . 
And I will wait for you . 
I feel that you 're the only creature in the world who has not condemned me . 
My dear boy , I feel it , you know . 
I ca n't help feeling it . '' 
* I 've seen the shadow of a coachman rubbing the shadow of a coach with the shadow of a brush . 
And he even began blubbering . 
He was sentimental . 
He was wicked and sentimental . 
Elders SOME of my readers may imagine that my young man was a sickly , ecstatic , poorly developed creature , a pale , consumptive dreamer . 
On the contrary , Alyosha was at this time a well-grown , red-cheeked , clear-eyed lad of nineteen , radiant with health . 
He was very handsome , too , graceful , moderately tall , with hair of a dark brown , with a regular , rather long , oval-shaped face , and wide-set dark grey , shining eyes ; he was very thoughtful , and apparently very serene . 
I shall be told , perhaps , that red cheeks are not incompatible with fanaticism and mysticism ; but I fancy that Alyosha was more of a realist than anyone . 
Oh ! 
no doubt , in the monastery he fully believed in miracles , but , to my thinking , miracles are never a stumbling-block to the realist . 
It is not miracles that dispose realists to belief . 
The genuine realist , if he is an unbeliever , will always find strength and ability to disbelieve in the miraculous , and if he is confronted with a miracle as an irrefutable fact he would rather disbelieve his own senses than admit the fact . 
Even if he admits it , he admits it as a fact of nature till then unrecognised by him . 
Faith does not , in the realist , spring from the miracle but the miracle from faith . 
If the realist once believes , then he is bound by his very realism to admit the miraculous also . 
The Apostle Thomas said that he would not believe till he saw , but when he did see he said , `` My Lord and my God ! '' 
Was it the miracle forced him to believe ? 
Most likely not , but he believed solely because he desired to believe and possibly he fully believed in his secret heart even when he said , `` I do not believe till I see . '' 
I shall be told , perhaps , that Alyosha was stupid , undeveloped , had not finished his studies , and so on . 
That he did not finish his studies is true , but to say that he was stupid or dull would be a great injustice . 
I 'll simply repeat what I have said above . 
He entered upon this path only because , at that time , it alone struck his imagination and presented itself to him as offering an ideal means of escape for his soul from darkness to light . 
Add to that that he was to some extent a youth of our last epoch - that is , honest in nature , desiring the truth , seeking for it and believing in it , and seeking to serve it at once with all the strength of his soul , seeking for immediate action , and ready to sacrifice everything , life itself , for it . 
Though these young men unhappily fail to understand that the sacrifice of life is , in many cases , the easiest of all sacrifices , and that to sacrifice , for instance , five or six years of their seething youth to hard and tedious study , if only to multiply tenfold their powers of serving the truth and the cause they have set before them as their goal such a sacrifice is utterly beyond the strength of many of them . 
The path Alyosha chose was a path going in the opposite direction , but he chose it with the same thirst for swift achievement . 
As soon as he reflected seriously he was convinced of the existence of God and immortality , and at once he instinctively said to himself : `` I want to live for immortality , and I will accept no compromise . '' 
In the same way , if he had decided that God and immortality did not exist , he would at once have become an atheist and a socialist . 
For socialism is not merely the labour question , it is before all things the atheistic question , the question of the form taken by atheism to-day , the question of the tower of Babel built without God , not to mount to heaven from earth but to set up heaven on earth . 
Alyosha would have found it strange and impossible to go on living as before . 
