The Brothers Karamazov by Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky 1879 The History of a Family Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov ALEXEY Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , a landowner well known in our district in his own day , and still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death , which happened thirteen years ago , and which I shall describe in its proper place . 
For the present I will only say that this `` landowner '' - for so we used to call him , although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own estate - was a strange type , yet one pretty frequently to be met with , a type abject and vicious and at the same time senseless . 
But he was one of those senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their worldly affairs , and , apparently , after nothing else . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , for instance , began with next to nothing ; his estate was of the smallest ; he ran to dine at other men 's tables , and fastened on them as a toady , yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hard cash . 
At the same time , he was all his life one of the most senseless , fantastical fellows in the whole district . 
I repeat , it was not stupidity - the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd and intelligent enough - but just senselessness , and a peculiar national form of it . 
He was married twice , and had three sons , the eldest , Dmitri , by his first wife , and two , Ivan and Alexey , by his second . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch 's first wife , Adelaida Ivanovna , belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noble family , also landowners in our district , the Miusovs . 
How it came to pass that an heiress , who was also a beauty , and moreover one of those vigorous intelligent girls , so common in this generation , but sometimes also to be found in the last , could have married such a worthless , puny weakling , as we all called him , I wo n't attempt to explain . 
I knew a young lady of the last `` romantic '' generation who after some years of an enigmatic passion for a gentleman , whom she might quite easily have married at any moment , invented insuperable obstacles to their union , and ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and rapid river from a high bank , almost a precipice , and so perished , entirely to satisfy her own caprice , and to be like Shakespeare 's Ophelia . 
Indeed , if this precipice , a chosen and favourite spot of hers , had been less picturesque , if there had been a prosaic flat bank in its place , most likely the suicide would never have taken place . 
This is a fact , and probably there have been not a few similar instances in the last two or three generations . 
Adelaida Ivanovna Miusov 's action was similarly , no doubt , an echo of other people 's ideas , and was due to the irritation caused by lack of mental freedom . 
She wanted , perhaps , to show her feminine independence , to override class distinctions and the despotism of her family . 
And a pliable imagination persuaded her , we must suppose , for a brief moment , that Fyodor Pavlovitch , in spite of his parasitic position , was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressive epoch , though he was , in fact , an ill-natured buffoon and nothing more . 
What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an elopement , and this greatly captivated Adelaida Ivanovna 's fancy . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch 's position at the time made him specially eager for any such enterprise , for he was passionately anxious to make a career in one way or another . 
To attach himself to a good family and obtain a dowry was an alluring prospect . 
As for mutual love it did not exist apparently , either in the bride or in him , in spite of Adelaida Ivanovna 's beauty . 
This was , perhaps , a unique case of the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch , who was always of a voluptuous temper , and ready to run after any petticoat on the slightest encouragement . 
She seems to have been the only woman who made no particular appeal to his senses . 
Immediatley after the elopement Adelaida Ivanovna discerned in a flash that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt . 
The marriage accordingly showed itself in its true colours with extraordinary rapidity . 
Although the family accepted the event pretty quickly and apportioned the runaway bride her dowry , the husband and wife began to lead a most disorderly life , and there were everlasting scenes between them . 
It was said that the young wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity than Fyodor Pavlovitch , who , as is now known , got hold of all her money up to twenty five thousand roubles as soon as she received it , so that those thousands were lost to her forever . 
The little village and the rather fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his utmost for a long time to transfer to his name , by means of some deed of conveyance . 
He would probably have succeeded , merely from her moral fatigue and desire to get rid of him , and from the contempt and loathing he aroused by his persistent and shameless importunity . 
But , fortunately , Adelaida Ivanovna 's family intervened and circumvented his greediness . 
It is known for a fact that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife , but rumour had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but was beaten by her , for she was a hot-tempered , bold , dark-browed , impatient woman , possessed of remarkable physical strength . 
Finally , she left the house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a destitute divinity student , leaving Mitya , a child of three years old , in her husband 's hands . 
Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced a regular harem into the house , and abandoned himself to orgies of drunkenness . 
In the intervals he used to drive all over the province , complaining tearfully to each and all of Adelaida Ivanovna 's having left him , going into details too disgraceful for a husband to mention in regard to his own married life . 
What seemed to gratify him and flatter his self-love most was to play the ridiculous part of the injured husband , and to parade his woes with embellishments . 
`` One would think that you 'd got a promotion , Fyodor Pavlovitch , you seem so pleased in spite of your sorrow , '' scoffers said to him . 
Many even added that he was glad of a new comic part in which to play the buffoon , and that it was simply to make it funnier that he pretended to be unaware of his ludicrous position . 
But , who knows , it may have been simplicity . 
At last he succeeded in getting on the track of his runaway wife . 
The poor woman turned out to be in Petersburg , where she had gone with her divinity student , and where she had thrown herself into a life of complete emancipation . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about , making preparations to go to Petersburg , with what object he could not himself have said . 
He would perhaps have really gone ; but having determined to do so he felt at once entitled to fortify himself for the journey by another bout of reckless drinking . 
And just at that time his wife 's family received the news of her death in Petersburg . 
She had died quite suddenly in a garret , according to one story , of typhus , or as another version had it , of starvation . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife 's death , and the story is that he ran out into the street and began shouting with joy , raising his hands to Heaven : `` Lord , now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace , '' but others say he wept without restraint like a little child , so much so that people were sorry for him , in spite of the repulsion he inspired . 
It is quite possible that both versions were true , that he rejoiced at his release , and at the same time wept for her who released him . 
As a general rule , people , even the wicked , are much more naive and simple-hearted than we suppose . 
And we ourselves are , too . 
He Gets Rid of His Eldest Son YOU can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and how he would bring up his children . 
His behaviour as a father was exactly what might be expected . 
He completely abandoned the child of his marriage with Adelaida Ivanovna , not from malice , nor because of his matrimonial grievances , but simply because he forgot him . 
While he was wearying everyone with his tears and complaints , and turning his house into a sink of debauchery , a faithful servant of the family , Grigory , took the three-year old Mitya into his care . 
If he had n't looked after him there would have been no one even to change the baby 's little shirt . 
It happened moreover that the child 's relations on his mother 's side forgot him too at first . 
His grandfather was no longer living , his widow , Mitya 's grandmother , had moved to Moscow , and was seriously ill , while his daughters were married , so that Mitya remained for almost a whole year in old Grigory 's charge and lived with him in the servant 's cottage . 
But if his father had remembered him -LRB- he could not , indeed , have been altogether unaware of his existence -RRB- he would have sent him back to the cottage , as the child would only have been in the way of his debaucheries . 
But a cousin of Mitya 's mother , Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miusov , happened to return from Paris . 
He lived for many years afterwards abroad , but was at that time quite a young . 
man , and distinguished among the Miusovs as a man of enlightened ideas and of European culture , who had been in the capitals and abroad . 
Towards the end of his life he became a Liberal of the type common in the forties and fifties . 
In the course of his career he had come into contact with many of the most Liberal men of his epoch , both in Russia and abroad . 
He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally , and in his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the Paris Revolution of February , 1848 , hinting that he himself had almost taken part in the fighting on the barricades . 
This was one of the most grateful recollections of his youth . 
He had an independent property of about a thousand souls , to reckon in the old style . 
His splendid estate lay on the outskirts of our little town and bordered on the lands of our famous monastery , with which Pyotr Alexandrovitch began an endless lawsuit , almost as soon as he came into the estate , concerning the rights of fishing in the river or wood-cutting in the forest , I do n't know exactly which . 
He regarded it as his duty as a citizen and a man of culture to open an attack upon the `` clericals . '' 
Hearing all about Adelaida Ivanovna , whom he , of course , remembered , and in whom he had at one time been interested , and learning of the existence of Mitya , he intervened , in spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He made the latter 's acquaintance for the first time , and told him directly that he wished to undertake the child 's education . 
He used long afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch , that when he began to speak of Mitya , Fyodor Pavlovitch looked for some time as though he did not understand what child he was talking about , and even as though he was surprised to hear that he had a little son in the house . 
The story may have been exaggerated , yet it must have been something like the truth . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting , of suddenly playing an unexpected part , sometimes without any motive for doing so , and even to his own direct disadvantage , as , for instance , in the present case . 
This habit , however , is characteristic of a very great number of people , some of them very clever ones , not like Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Pyotr Alexandrovitch carried the business through vigorously , and was appointed , with Fyodor Pavlovitch , joint guardian of the child , who had a small property , a house and land , left him by his mother . 
Mitya did , in fact , pass into this cousin 's keeping , but as the latter had no family of his own , and after securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at once to Paris , he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins , a lady living in Moscow . 
It came to pass that , settling permanently in Paris he , too , forgot the child , especially when the Revolution of February broke out , making an impression on his mind that he remembered all the rest of his life . 
The Moscow lady died , and Mitya passed into the care of one of her married daughters . 
I believe he changed his home a fourth time later on . 
I wo n't enlarge upon that now , as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's firstborn , and must confine myself now to the most essential facts about him , without which I could not begin my story . 
In the first place , this Mitya , or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch , was the only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's three sons who grew up in the belief that he had property , and that he would be independent on coming of age . 
He spent an irregular boyhood and youth . 
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium , he got into a military school , then went to the Caucasus , was promoted , fought a duel , and was degraded to the ranks , earned promotion again , led a wild life , and spent a good deal of money . 
He did not begin to receive any income from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age , and until then got into debt . 
He saw and knew his father , Fyodor Pavlovitch , for the first time on coming of age , when he visited our neighbourhood on purpose to settle with him about his property . 
He seems not to have liked his father . 
He did not stay long with him , and made haste to get away , having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of money , and entering into an agreement for future payments from the estate , of the revenues and value of which he was unable -LRB- a fact worthy of note -RRB- , upon this occasion , to get a statement from his father . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time then -LRB- this , too , should be noted -RRB- that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated idea of his property . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with this , as it fell in with his own designs . 
He gathered only that the young man was frivolous , unruly , of violent passions , impatient , and dissipated , and that if he could only obtain ready money he would be satisfied , although only , of course , a short time . 
So Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take advantage of this fact , sending him from time to time small doles , instalments . 
In the end , when four years later , Mitya , losing patience , came a second time to our little town to settle up once for all with his father , it turned out to his amazement that he had nothing , that it was difficult to get an account even , that he had received the whole value of his property in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch , and was perhaps even in debt to him , that by various agreements into which he had , of his own desire , entered at various previous dates , he had no right to expect anything more , and so on , and so on . 
The young man was overwhelmed , suspected deceit and cheating , and was almost beside himself . 
And , indeed , this circumstance led to the catastrophe , the account of which forms the subject of my first introductory story , or rather the external side of it . 
But before I pass to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch 's other two sons , and of their origin . 
The Second Marriage and the Second Family VERY shortly after getting his four-year-old Mitya off his hands Fyodor Pavlovitch married a second time . 
His second marriage lasted eight years . 
He took this second wife , Sofya Ivanovna , also a very young girl , from another province , where he had gone upon some small piece of business in company with a Jew . 
Though Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious debauchee he never neglected investing his capital , and managed his business affairs very successfully , though , no doubt , not over-scrupulously . 
Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon , and was left from childhood an orphan without relations . 
She grew up in the house of a general 's widow , a wealthy old lady of good position , who was at once her benefactress and tormentor . 
I do not know the details , but I have only heard that the orphan girl , a meek and gentle creature , was once cut down from a halter in which she was hanging from a nail in the loft , so terrible were her sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging of this old woman , who was apparently not bad-hearted but had become an insufferable tyrant through idleness . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer ; inquiries were made about him and he was refused . 
But again , as in his first marriage , he proposed an elopement to the orphan girl . 
