`` But I could n't tell that he would come with a bad finger , or else perhaps I might have done it on purpose . 
My darling mamma , you begin to say really witty things . '' 
`` Never mind my being witty , but I must say you show nice feeling for Alexey Fyodorovitch 's sufferings ! 
Oh , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , what 's killing me is no one thing in particular , not Herzenstube , but everything together , that 's what is too much for me . '' 
`` That 's enough , mamma , enough about Herzenstube , '' Lise laughed gaily . 
`` Make haste with the lint and the lotion , mamma . 
That 's simply Goulard 's water , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I remember the name now , but it 's a splendid lotion . 
Would you believe it , Mamma , on the way here he had a fight with the boys in the street , and it was a boy bit his finger , is n't he a child , a child himself ? 
Is he fit to be married after that ? 
For only fancy , he wants to be married , mamma . 
Just think of him married , would n't it be funny , would n't it be awful ? '' 
And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle , looking slyly at Alyosha . 
`` But why married , Lise ? 
What makes you talk of such a thing ? 
It 's quite out of place and perhaps the boy was rabid . '' 
`` Why , mamma ! 
As though there were rabid boys ! '' 
`` Why not , Lise , as though I had said something stupid ! 
Your boy might have been bitten by a mad dog and he would become mad and bite anyone near him . 
How well she has bandaged it , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
I could n't have done it . 
Do you still feel the pain ? '' 
`` It 's nothing much now . '' 
`` You do n't feel afraid of water ? '' 
asked Lise . 
`` Come , that 's enough , Lise , perhaps I really was rather too quick talking of the boy being rabid , and you pounced upon it at once . 
Katerina Ivanovna has only just heard that you are here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she simply rushed at me , she 's dying to see you , dying ! '' 
`` Ach , mamma , go to them yourself . 
He ca n't go just now , he is in too much pain . '' 
`` Not at all , I can go quite well , '' said Alyosha . 
`` What ! 
You are going away ? 
Is that what you say ? '' 
`` Well , when I 've seen them , I 'll come back here and we can talk as much as you like . 
But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once , for I am very anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can . '' 
`` Mamma , take him away quickly . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , do n't trouble to come and see me afterwards , but go straight back to your monastery and a good riddance . 
I want to sleep , I did n't sleep all night . '' 
`` Ah , Lise , you are only making fun , but how I wish you would sleep ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` I do n't know what I 've done ... . 
I 'll stay another three minutes , five if you like , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Even five ! 
Do take him away quickly , mamma , he is a monster . '' 
`` Lise , you are crazy . 
Let us go , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she is too capricious to-day . 
I am afraid to cross her . 
Oh , the trouble one has with nervous girls ! 
Perhaps she really will be able to sleep after seeing you . 
How quickly you have made her sleepy , and how fortunate it is ! '' 
`` Ah , mamma , how sweetly you talk ! 
I must kiss you for it , mamma . '' 
`` And I kiss you too , Lise . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov began mysteriously and importantly , speaking in a rapid whisper . 
`` I do n't want to suggest anything , I do n't want to lift the veil , you will see for yourself what 's going on . 
It 's appalling . 
It 's the most fantastic farce . 
She loves your brother , Ivan , and she is doing her utmost to persuade herself she loves your brother , Dmitri . 
It 's appalling ! 
I 'll go in with you , and if they do n't turn me out , I 'll stay to the end . '' 
A Laceration in the Drawing-Room BUT in the drawing-room the conversation was already over . 
Katerina Ivanovna was greatly excited , though she looked resolute . 
At the moment Alyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered , Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to take leave . 
His face was rather pale , and Alyosha looked at him anxiously . 
For this moment was to solve a doubt , a harassing enigma which had for some time haunted Alyosha . 
During the preceding month it had been several times suggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna , and , what was more , that he meant `` to carry her off from Dmitri . 
Until quite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous , though it worried him extremely . 
He loved both his brothers , and dreaded such rivalry between them . 
Meantime , Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he was glad that Ivan was his rival , and that it was a great assistance to him , Dmitri . 
In what way did it assist him ? 
To marry Grushenka ? 
But that Alyosha considered the worst thing possible . 
Besides all this , Alyosha had till the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had a steadfast and passionate love for Dmitri ; but he had only believed it till the evening before . 
He had fancied , too , that she was incapable of loving a man like Ivan , and that she did love Dmitri , and loved him just as he was , in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion . 
But during yesterday 's scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him . 
The word `` lacerating , '' which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered , almost made him start , because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had cried out `` Laceration , laceration , '' probably applying it to his dream . 
He had been dreaming all night of the previous day 's scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov 's blunt and persistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan , and only deceived herself through some sort of pose , from `` self-laceration , '' and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fancied duty of gratitude . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` perhaps the whole truth lies in those words . '' 
But in that case what was Ivan 's position ? 
Alyosha felt instinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna 's must dominate , and she could only dominate someone like Dmitri , and never a man like Ivan . 
For Dmitri might - at last submit to her domination `` to his own happiness '' -LRB- which was what Alyosha would have desired -RRB- , but Ivan - no , Ivan could not submit to her , and such submission would not give him happiness . 
Alyosha could not help believing that of Ivan . 
And now all these doubts and reflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing-room . 
Another idea , too , forced itself upon him : `` What if she loved neither of them - neither Ivan nor Dmitri ? '' 
It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughts and blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month . 
`` What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions ? '' 
he thought reproachfully , after such doubts and surmises . 
And yet it was impossible not to think about it . 
He felt instinctively that this rivalry was of immense importance in his brothers ' lives and that a great deal depended upon it . 
`` One reptile will devour the other , '' Ivan had pronounced the day before , speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri . 
So Ivan looked upon Dmitri as a reptile , and perhaps long done so . 
Was it perhaps since he had known Katerina Ivanovna ? 
That phrase had , of course , escaped Ivan unawares yesterday , but that only made it more important . 
If he felt like that , what chance was there of peace ? 
Were there not , on the contrary , new grounds for hatred and hostility in their family ? 
And with which of them was Alyosha to sympathise ? 
And what was he to wish for each of them ? 
He loved them both , but what could he desire for each in the midst of these conflicting interests ? 
He might go quite astray in this maze , and Alyosha 's heart could not endure uncertainty , because his love was always of an active character . 
