She ran up panting , clasped her hands before him with a cry , and plumped down at his feet . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , dear good Dmitri Fyodorovitch , do n't harm my mistress . 
And it was I told you all about it ... . 
And do n't murder him , he came first , he 's hers ! 
He 'll marry Agrafena Alexandrovna now . 
That 's why he 's come back from Siberia . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , dear , do n't take a fellow creature 's life ! '' 
`` Tut-tut-tut ! 
That 's it , is it ? 
So you 're off there to make trouble ! '' 
muttered Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Now , it 's all clear , as clear as daylight . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , give me your pistols at once if you mean to behave like a man , '' he shouted aloud to Mitya . 
`` Do you hear , Dmitri ? '' 
`` The pistols ? 
Wait a bit , brother , I 'll throw them into the pool on the road , '' answered Mitya . 
`` Fenya , get up , do n't kneel to me . 
Mitya wo n't hurt anyone , the silly fool wo n't hurt anyone again . 
But I say , Fenya , '' he shouted , after having taken his seat . 
`` I hurt you just now , so forgive me and have pity on me , forgive a scoundrel ... . 
But it does n't matter if you do n't . 
It 's all the same now . 
Now then , Andrey , look alive , fly along full speed ! '' 
Andrey whipped up the horses , and the bells began ringing . 
`` Good-bye , Pyotr Ilyitch ! 
My last tear is for you ! 
... '' `` He 's not drunk , but he keeps babbling like a lunatic , '' Pyotr Ilyitch thought as he watched him go . 
He had half a mind to stay and see the cart packed with the remaining wines and provisions , knowing that they would deceive and defraud Mitya . 
But , suddenly feeling vexed with himself , he turned away with a curse and went to the tavern to play billiards . 
`` He 's a fool , though he 's a good fellow , '' he muttered as he went . 
`` I 've heard of that officer , Grushenka 's former flame . 
Well , if he has turned up ... . 
Ech , those pistols ! 
Damn it all ! 
I 'm not his nurse ! 
Let them do what they like ! 
Besides , it 'll all come to nothing . 
They 're a set of brawlers , that 's all . 
They 'll drink and fight , fight and make friends again . 
They are not men who do anything real . 
What does he mean by ` I 'm stepping aside , I 'm punishing myself ' ? 
It 'll come to nothing ! 
He 's shouted such phrases a thousand times , drunk , in the taverns . 
But now he 's not drunk . 
` Drunk in spirit ' - they 're fond of fine phrases , the villains . 
Am I his nurse ? 
He must have been fighting , his face was all over blood . 
With whom ? 
I shall find out at the Metropolis . 
And his handkerchief was soaked in blood ... . 
It 's still lying on my floor ... . 
Hang it ! '' 
He reached the tavern in a bad humour and at once made up a game . 
The game cheered him . 
He played a second game , and suddenly began telling one of his partners that Dmitri Karamazov had come in for some cash again - something like three thousand roubles , and had gone to Mokroe again to spend it with Grushenka ... . 
This news roused singular interest in his listeners . 
They all spoke of it , not laughing , but with a strange gravity . 
They left off playing . 
`` Three thousand ? 
But where can he have got three thousand ? '' 
Questions were asked . 
The story of Madame Hohlakov 's present was received with scepticism . 
`` Has n't he robbed his old father ? 
- that 's the question . '' 
`` Three thousand ! 
There 's something odd about it . '' 
`` He boasted aloud that he would kill his father ; we all heard him , here . 
And it was three thousand he talked about ... '' Pyotr Ilyitch listened . 
All at once he became short and dry in his answers . 
He said not a word about the blood on Mitya 's face and hands , though he had meant to speak of it at first . 
They began a third game , and by degrees the talk about Mitya died away . 
But by the end of the third game , Pyotr Ilyitch felt no more desire for billiards ; he laid down the cue , and without having supper as he had intended , he walked out of the tavern . 
When he reached the market-place he stood still in perplexity , wondering at himself . 
He realised that what he wanted was to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's and find out if anything had happened there . 
`` On account of some stupid nonsense as it 's sure to turn out - am I going to wake up the household and make a scandal ? 
Fooh ! 
damn it , is it my business to look after them ? '' 
In a very bad humour he went straight home , and suddenly remembered Fenya . 
`` Damn it all ! 
I ought to have questioned her just now , '' he thought with vexation , `` I should have heard everything . '' 
And the desire to speak to her , and so find out , became so pressing and importunate that when he was halfway home he turned abruptly and went towards the house where Grushenka lodged . 
Going up to the gate he knocked . 
The sound of the knock in the silence of the night sobered him and made him feel annoyed . 
And no one answered him ; everyone in the house was asleep . 
`` And I shall be making a fuss ! '' 
he thought , with a feeling of positive discomfort . 
But instead of going away altogether , he fell to knocking again with all his might , filling the street with clamour . 
`` Not coming ? 
Well , I will knock them up , I will ! '' 
he muttered at each knock , fuming at himself , but at the same time he redoubled his knocks on the gate . 
`` I Am Coming , Too ! '' 
BUT Dmitri Fyodorovitch was speeding along the road . 
It was a little more than twenty versts to Mokroe , but Andrey 's three horses galloped at such a pace that the distance might be covered in an hour and a quarter . 
The swift motion revived Mitya . 
The air was fresh and cool , there were big stars shining in the sky . 
It was the very night , and perhaps the very hour , in which Alyosha fell on the earth , and rapturously swore to love it for ever and ever . 
All was confusion , confusion in Mitya 's soul , but although many things were goading his heart , at that moment his whole being was yearning for her , his queen , to whom he was flying to look on her for the last time . 
One thing I can say for certain ; his heart did not waver for one instant . 
I shall perhaps not be believed when I say that this jealous lover felt not the slightest jealousy of this new rival , who seemed to have sprung out of the earth . 
If any other had appeared on the scene , he would have been jealous at once , and would-perhaps have stained his fierce hands with blood again . 
