`` Write it down , by all means . 
I know that 's another fact that tells against me , but I 'm not afraid of facts and I tell them against myself . 
Do you hear ? 
Do you know , gentlemen , you take me for a different sort of man from what I am , '' he added , suddenly gloomy and dejected . 
`` You have to deal with a man of honour , a man of the highest honour ; above all do n't lose sight of it - a man who 's done a lot of nasty things , but has always been , and still is , honourable at bottom , in his inner being . 
I do n't know how to express it . 
That 's just what 's made me wretched all my life , that I yearned to be honourable , that I was , so to say , a martyr to a sense of honour , seeking for it with a lantern , with the lantern of Diogenes , and yet all my life I 've been doing filthy things like all of us , gentlemen ... that is like me alone . 
That was a mistake , like me alone , me alone ! 
... Gentlemen , my head aches ... '' His brows contracted with pain . 
`` You see , gentlemen , I could n't bear the look of him , there was something in him ignoble , impudent , trampling on everything sacred , something sneering and irreverent , loathsome , loathsome . 
But now that he 's dead , I feel differently . '' 
`` How do you mean ? '' 
`` I do n't feel differently , but I wish I had n't hated him so . '' 
`` You feel penitent ? '' 
`` No , not penitent , do n't write that . 
I 'm not much good myself ; I 'm not very beautiful , so I had no right to consider him repulsive . 
That 's what I mean . 
Write that down , if you like . '' 
Saying this Mitya became very mournful . 
He had grown more and more gloomy as the inquiry continued . 
At that moment another unexpected scene followed . 
Though Grushenka had been removed , she had not been taken far away , only into the room next but one from the blue room , in which the examination was proceeding . 
It was a little room with one window , next beyond the large room in which they had danced and feasted so lavishly . 
She was sitting there with no one by her but Maximov , who was terribly depressed , terribly scared , and clung to her side , as though for security . 
At their door stood one of the peasants with a metal plate on his breast . 
Grushenka was crying , and suddenly her grief was too much for her , she jumped up , flung up her arms and , with a loud wail of sorrow , rushed out of the room to him , to her Mitya , and so unexpectedly that they had not time to stop her . 
Mitya , hearing her cry , trembled , jumped up , and with a yell rushed impetuously to meet her , not knowing what he was doing . 
But they were not allowed to come together , though they saw one another . 
He was seized by the arms . 
He struggled , and tried to tear himself away . 
It took three or four men to hold him . 
She was seized too , and he saw her stretching out her arms to him , crying aloud as they carried her away . 
When the scene was over , he came to himself again , sitting in the same place as before , opposite the investigating lawyer , and crying out to them : `` What do you want with her ? 
Why do you torment her ? 
She 's done nothing , nothing ! 
The lawyers tried to soothe him . 
About ten minutes passed like this . 
At last Mihail Makarovitch , who had been absent , came hurriedly into the room , and said in a loud and excited voice to the prosecutor : `` She 's been removed , she 's downstairs . 
Will you allow me to say one word to this unhappy man , gentlemen ? 
In your presence , gentlemen , in your presence . '' 
`` By all means , Mihail Makarovitch , '' answered the investigating lawyer . 
`` In the present case we have nothing against it . '' 
`` Listen , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear fellow , '' began the police captain , and there was a look of warm , almost fatherly , feeling for the luckless prisoner on his excited face . 
`` I took your Agrafena Alexandrovna downstairs myself , and confided her to the care of the landlord 's daughters , and that old fellow Maximov is with her all the time . 
And I soothed her , do you hear ? 
I soothed and calmed her . 
I impressed on her that you have to clear yourself , so she must n't hinder you , must not depress you , or you may lose your head and say the wrong thing in your evidence . 
In fact , I talked to her and she understood . 
She 's a sensible girl , my boy , a good-hearted girl , she would have kissed my old hands , begging help for you . 
She sent me herself , to tell you not to worry about her . 
And I must go , my dear fellow , I must go and tell her that you are calm and comforted about her . 
And so you must be calm , do you understand ? 
I was unfair to her ; she is a Christian soul , gentlemen , yes , I tell you , she 's a gentle soul , and not to blame for anything . 
So what am I to tell her , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
Will you sit quiet or not ? '' 
The good-natured police captain said a great deal that was irregular , but Grushenka 's suffering , a fellow creature 's suffering , touched his good-natured heart , and tears stood in his eyes . 
Mitya jumped up and rushed towards him . 
`` Forgive me , gentlemen , oh , allow me , allow me ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 've the heart of an angel , an angel , Mihail Makarovitch , I thank you for her . 
I will , I will be calm , cheerful , in fact . 
Tell her , in the kindness of your heart , that I am cheerful , quite cheerful , that I shall be laughing in a minute , knowing that she has a guardian angel like you . 
I shall have done with all this directly , and as soon as I 'm free , I 'll be with her , she 'll see , let her wait . 
Gentlemen , '' he said , turning to the two lawyers , now I 'll open my whole soul to you ; I 'll pour out everything . 
We 'll finish this off directly , finish it off gaily . 
We shall laugh at it in the end , sha n't we ? 
But gentlemen , that woman is the queen of my heart . 
Oh , let me tell you that . 
That one thing I 'll tell you now ... . 
I see I 'm with honourable men . 
She is my light , she is my holy one , and if only you knew ! 
Did you hear her cry , ` I 'll go to death with you ' ? 
And what have I , a penniless beggar , done for her ? 
Why such love for me ? 
How can a clumsy , ugly brute like me , with my ugly face , deserve such love , that she is ready to go to exile with me ? 
And how she fell down at your feet for my sake , just now ! 
... and yet she 's proud and has done nothing ! 
How can I help adoring her , how can I help crying out and rushing to her as I did just now ? 
Gentlemen , forgive me ! 
But now , now I am comforted . '' 
And he sank back in his chair and , covering his face with his hands , burst into tears . 
But they were happy tears . 
He recovered himself instantly . 
The old police captain seemed much pleased , and the lawyers also . 
They felt that the examination was passing into a new phase . 
When the police captain went out , Mitya was positively gay . 
`` Now , gentlemen , I am at your disposal , entirely at your disposal . 
And if it were not for all these trivial details , we should understand one another in a minute . 
I 'm at those details again . 
I 'm at your disposal , gentlemen , but I declare that we must have mutual confidence , you in me and I in you , or there 'll be no end to it . 
I speak in your interests . 
To business , gentlemen , to business , and do n't rummage in my soul ; do n't tease me with trifles , but only ask me about facts and what matters , and I will satisfy you at once . 
And damn the details ! '' 
So spoke Mitya . 
The interrogation began again . 
The Second Ordeal `` YOU do n't know how you encourage us , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , by your readiness to answer , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , with an animated air , and obvious satisfaction beaming in his very prominent , short-sighted , light grey eyes , from which he had removed his spectacles a moment before . 
`` And you have made a very just remark about the mutual confidence , without which it is sometimes positively impossible to get on in cases of such importance , if the suspected party really hopes and desires to defend himself and is in a position to do so . 
We on our side , will do everything in our power , and you can see for yourself how we are conducting the case . 
You approve , Ippolit Kirillovitch ? '' 
He turned to the prosecutor . 
