`` Would you like to get married ? 
Shall I find you a wife ? '' 
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger , and made no reply . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture . 
The great thing was that he had absolute confidence in his honesty . 
It happened once , when Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk , that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received . 
He only missed them next day , and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table . 
Where had they come from ? 
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before . 
`` Well , my lad , I 've never met anyone like you , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly , and gave him ten roubles . 
We may add that he not only believed in his honesty , but had , for some reason , a liking for him , although the young man looked as morosely at him as at everyone and was always silent . 
He rarely spoke . 
If it had occurred to anyone to wonder at the time what the young man was interested in , and what was in his mind , it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him . 
Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house , or even in the yard or street , and would stand still for ten minutes , lost in thought . 
A physiognomist studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it , no reflection , but only a sort of contemplation . 
There is a remarkable picture by the painter Kramskoy , called `` Contemplation . '' 
There is a forest in winter , and on a roadway through the forest , in absolute solitude , stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes . 
He stands , as it were , lost in thought . 
Yet he is not thinking ; he is `` contemplating . '' 
If anyone touched him he would start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered . 
It 's true he would come to himself immediately ; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about , he would remember nothing . 
Yet probably he has , hidden within himself , the impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation . 
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them imperceptibly , and even unconsciously . 
How and why , of course , he does not know either . 
He may suddenly , after hoarding impressions for many years , abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul 's salvation , or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village , and perhaps do both . 
There are a good many `` contemplatives '' among the peasantry . 
Well , Smerdyakov was probably one of them , and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions , hardly knowing why . 
The Controversy BUT Balaam 's ass had suddenly spoken . 
The subject was a strange one . 
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases , and had heard from the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in the newspaper of that day . 
This soldier had been taken prisoner in some remote part of Asia , and was threatened with an immediate agonising death if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam . 
He refused to deny his faith , and was tortured , flayed alive , and died , praising and glorifying Christ . 
Grigory had related the story at table . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked , over the dessert after dinner , to laugh and talk , if only with Grigory . 
This afternoon he was in a particularly good-humoured and expansive mood . 
Sipping his brandy and listening to the story , he observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that , and to take his skin to some monastery . 
`` That would make the people flock , and bring the money in . '' 
Grigory frowned , seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched , but , as usual , was beginning to scoff . 
At that moment Smerdyakov , who was standing by the door , smiled . 
Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the end of dinner , and since Ivan 's arrival in our town he had done so every day . 
`` What are you grinning at ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , catching the smile instantly , and knowing that it referred to Grigory . 
`` Well , my opinion is , '' Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a loud voice , `` that if that laudable soldier 's exploit was so very great there would have been , to my thinking , no sin in it if he had on such an emergency renounced , so to speak , the name of Christ and his own christening , to save by that same his life , for good deeds , by which , in the course of years to expiate his cowardice . '' 
`` How could it not be a sin ? 
You 're talking nonsense . 
For that you 'll go straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton , '' put in Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It was at this point that Alyosha came in , and Fyodor Pavlovitch , as we have seen , was highly delighted at his appearance . 
`` We 're on your subject , your subject , '' he chuckled gleefully , making Alyosha sit down to listen . 
`` As for mutton , that 's not so , and there 'll be nothing there for this , and there should n't be either , if it 's according to justice , '' Smerdyakov maintained stoutly . 
`` How do you mean ` according to justice ' ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still more gaily , nudging Alyosha with his knee . 
`` He 's a rascal , that 's what he is ! '' 
burst from Grigory . 
He looked Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face . 
`` As for being a rascal , wait a little , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' answered Smerdyakov with perfect composure . 
`` You 'd better consider yourself that , once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race , and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy christening , I am fully entitled to act by my own reason , since there would be no sin in it . '' 
`` But you 've said that before . 
Do n't waste words . 
Prove it , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Soup-maker ! '' 
muttered Grigory contemptuously . 
`` As for being a soup-maker , wait a bit , too , and consider for yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , without abusing me . 
For as soon as I say to those enemies , ` No , I 'm not a Christian , and I curse my true God , ' then at once , by God 's high judgment , I become immediately and specially anathema accursed , and am cut off from the Holy Church , exactly as though I were a heathen , so that at that very instant , not only when I say it aloud , but when I think of saying it , before a quarter of a second has passed , I am cut off . 
Is that so or not , Grigory Vassilyevitch ? '' 
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction , though he was really answering Fyodor Pavlovitch 's questions , and was well aware of it , and intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions . 
`` Ivan , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly , `` stoop down for me to whisper . 
He 's got this all up for your benefit . 
He wants you to praise him . 
Praise him . '' 
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father 's excited whisper . 
`` Stay , Smerdyakov , be quiet a minute , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more . 
`` Ivan , your ear again . '' 
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face . 
`` I love you as I do Alyosha . 
Do n't think I do n't love you . 
Some brandy ? '' 
`` Yes . 
- But you 're rather drunk yourself , '' thought Ivan , looking steadily at his father . 
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity . 
`` You 're anathema accursed , as it is , Grigory suddenly burst out , `` and how dare you argue , you rascal , after that , if - '' `` Do n't scold him , Grigory , do n't scold him , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him short . 
`` You should wait , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if only a short time , and listen , for I have n't finished all I had to say . 
For at the very moment I become accursed , at that same highest moment , I become exactly like a heathen , and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail . 
Is n't that so ? '' 
`` Make haste and finish , my boy , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him , sipping from his wineglass with relish . 
`` And if I 've ceased to be a Christian , then I told no lie to the enemy when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian , seeing I had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the thought alone , before I had time to utter a word to the enemy . 
And if I have already been discharged , in what manner and with what sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having denied Christ , when , through the very thought alone , before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening ? 
If I 'm no longer a Christian , then I ca n't renounce Christ , for I 've nothing then to renounce . 
Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible , Grigory Vassilyevitch , even in heaven , for not having been born a Christian ? 
And who would punish him for that , considering that you ca n't take two skins off one ox ? 
For God Almighty Himself , even if He did make the Tatar responsible , when he dies would give him the smallest possible punishment , I imagine -LRB- since he must be punished -RRB- , judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen , from heathen parents . 
The Lord God ca n't surely take a Tatar and say he was a Christian ? 
That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real untruth . 
And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie , even in one word ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator , his eyes nearly starting out of his head . 
Though he did not clearly understand what was said , he had caught something in this rigmarole , and stood , looking like a man who has just hit his head against a wall . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh . 
`` Alyosha ! 
Alyosha ! 
What do you say to that ! 
Ah , you casuist ! 
