After this sketch of her character it may well be understood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief , from malice . 
`` After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation , during which he betrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honour , the prisoner was driven almost to frenzy , almost to madness by continual jealousy - and of whom ? 
His father ! 
And the worst of it was that the crazy old man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means of that very three thousand roubles , which the son looked upon as his own property , part of his inheritance from his mother , of which his father was cheating him . 
Yes , I admit it was hard to bear ! 
It might well drive a man to madness . 
It was not the money , but the fact that this money was used with such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness ! '' 
Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering his father had entered the prisoner 's head , and illustrated his theory with facts . 
`` At first he only talked about it in taverns - he was talking about it all that month . 
Ah , he likes being always surrounded with company , and he likes to tell his companions everything , even his most diabolical and dangerous ideas ; he likes to share every thought with others , and expects , for some reason , that those he confides in will meet him with perfect sympathy , enter into all his troubles and anxieties , take his part and not oppose him in anything . 
If not , he flies into a rage and smashes up everything in the tavern . 
-LRB- Then followed the anecdote about Captain Snegiryov . -RRB- 
Those who heard the prisoner began to think at last that he might mean more than threats , and that such a frenzy might turn threats into actions . '' 
Here the prosecutor described the meeting of the family at the monastery , the conversations with Alyosha , and the horrible scene of violence when the prisoner had rushed into his father 's house just after dinner . 
`` I can not positively assert , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that the prisoner fully intended to murder his father before that incident . 
Yet the idea had several times presented itself to him , and he had deliberated on it - for that we have facts , witnesses , and his own words . 
I confess , gentlemen of the jury , '' he added , `` that till to-day I have been uncertain whether to attribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation . 
I was firmly convinced that he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand , but had only pictured it , contemplating it as a possibility . 
He had not definitely considered when and how he might commit the crime . 
`` But I was only uncertain till to-day , till that fatal document was presented to the court just now . 
You yourselves heard that young lady 's exclamation , ` It is the plan , the programme of the murder ! ' 
That is how she defined that miserable , drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner . 
And , in fact , from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder was premeditated . 
It was written two days before , and so we know now for a fact that , forty-eight hours before the perpetration of his terrible design , the prisoner swore that , if he could not get money next day , he would murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes from under his pillow , as soon as Ivan had left . 
` As soon as Ivan had gone away ' - you hear that ; so he had thought everything out , weighing every circumstance , and he carried it all out just as he had written it . 
The proof of premeditation is conclusive ; the crime must have been committed for the sake of the money , that is stated clearly , that is written and signed . 
The prisoner does not deny his signature . 
`` I shall be told he was drunk when he wrote it . 
But that does not diminish the value of the letter , quite the contrary ; he wrote when drunk what he had planned when sober . 
Had he not planned it when sober , he would not have written it when drunk . 
I shall be asked : Then why did he talk about it in taverns ? 
A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps it to himself . 
Yes , but he talked about it before he had formed a plan , when he had only the desire , only the impulse to it . 
Afterwards he talked less about it . 
On the evening he wrote that letter at the Metropolis tavern , contrary to his custom he was silent , though he had been drinking . 
He did not play billiards , he sat in a corner , talked to no one . 
He did indeed turn a shopman out of his seat , but that was done almost unconsciously , because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance . 
It is true that after he had taken the final decision , he must have felt apprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand , and that this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards . 
But there was nothing for it ; he could not take his words back , but his luck had served him before , it would serve him again . 
He believed in his star , you know ! 
I must confess , too , that he did a great deal to avoid the fatal catastrophe . 
` To-morrow I shall try and borrow the money from everyone , ' as he writes in his peculiar language , ' and if they wo n't give it to me , there will be bloodshed . ' '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya 's efforts to borrow the money . 
He described his visit to Samsonov , his journey to Lyagavy . 
`` Harassed , jeered at , hungry , after selling his watch to pay for the journey -LRB- though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubles on him - a likely story -RRB- , tortured by jealousy at having left the object of his affections in the town , suspecting that she would go to Fyodor Pavlovitch in his absense , he returned at last to the town , to find , to his joy , that she had not been near his father . 
He accompanied her himself to her protector . 
-LRB- Strange to say , he does n't seem to have been jealous of Samsonov , which is psychologically interesting . -RRB- 
Then he hastens back to his ambush in the back gardens , and then learns that Smerdyakov is in a fit , that the other servant is ill - the coast is clear and he knows the ` signals ' - what a temptation ! 
Still he resists it ; he goes off to a lady who has for some time been residing in the town , and who is highly esteemed among us , Madame Hohlakov . 
That lady , who had long watched his career with compassion , gave him the most judicious advice , to give up his dissipated life , his unseemly love-affair , the waste of his youth and vigour in pot-house debauchery , and to set off to Siberia to the gold mines : ` that would be an outlet for your turbulent energies , your romantic character , your thirst for adventure . ' '' 
After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when the prisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov 's , the sudden frenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion , at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father , Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence of chance . 
`` Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her former lover , nothing would have happened . 
But she lost her head , she could only swear and protest her ignorance , and if the prisoner did not kill her on the spot , it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false mistress . 
`` But note , frantic as he was , he took with him a brass pestle . 
Why that ? 
Why not some other weapon ? 
But since he had been contemplating his plan and preparing himself for it for a whole month , he would snatch up anything like a weapon that caught his eye . 
He had realised for a month past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon , so he instantly , without hesitation , recognised that it would serve his purpose . 
So it was by no means unconsciously , by no means involuntarily , that he snatched up that fatal pestle . 
And then we find him in his father 's garden - the coast is clear , there are no witnesses , darkness and jealousy . 
The suspicion that she was there , with him , with his rival , in his arms , and perhaps laughing at him at that moment - took his breath away . 
And it was not mere suspicion , the deception was open , obvious . 
She must be there , in that lighted room , she must be behind the screen ; and the unhappy man would have us believe that he stole up to the window , peeped respectfully in , and discreetly withdrew , for fear something terrible and immoral should happen . 
And he tries to persuade us of that , us , who understand his character , who know his state of mind at the moment , and that he knew the signals by which he could at once enter the house . '' 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of Smerdyakov with the murder . 
He did this very circumstantially , and everyone realised that , although he professed to despise that suspicion , he thought the subject of great importance . 
A Treatise on Smerdyakov `` TO begin with , what was the source of this suspicion ? '' 
-LRB- Ippolit Kirillovitch began -RRB- . 
`` The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest , yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to confirm the charge , nor the faintest suggestion of a fact . 
The charge is confirmed by three persons only - the two brothers of the prisoner and Madame Svyetlov . 
The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only to-day , when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever . 
But we know that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of his brother 's guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea . 
But of that later . 
The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact to support his notion of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and has only been led to that conclusion from the prisoner 's own words and the expression of his face . 
Yes , that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to-day by him . 
Madame Svyetslov was even more astounding . 
` What the prisoner tells you , you must believe ; he is not a man to tell a lie . ' 
That is all the evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons . 
who are all deeply concerned in the prisoner 's fate . 
And yet the theory of Smerdyakov 's guilt has been noised about , has been and is still maintained . 
Is it credible ? 
Is it conceivable ? '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personality of Smerdyakov , `` who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity . '' 
He depicted him as a man of weak intellect , with a smattering of education , who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his level and certain modern theories of duty , which he learnt in practice from the reckless life of his master , who was also perhaps his father - Fyodor Pavlovitch ; and , theoretically , from various strange philosophical conversations with his master 's elder son , Ivan Fyodorovitch , who readily indulged in this diversion , probably feeling dull or wishing to amuse himself at the valet 's expense . 
`` He spoke to me himself of his spiritual condition during the last few days at his father 's house , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch explained ; `` but others too have borne witness to it - the prisoner himself , his brother , and the servant Grigory - that is , all who knew him well . 
`` Moreover , Smerdyakov , whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy , had not the courage of a chicken . 
` He fell at my feet and kissed them , ' the prisoner himself has told us , before he realised how damaging such a statement was to himself . 
` He is an epileptic chicken , ' he declared about him in his characteristic language . 
And the prisoner chose him for his confidant -LRB- we have his own word for it -RRB- and he frightened him into consenting at last to act as a spy for him . 
In that capacity he deceived his master , revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the house . 
How could he help telling him , indeed ? 
` He would have killed me , I could see that he would have killed me , ' he said at the inquiry , trembling and shaking even before us , though his tormentor was by that time arrested and could do him no harm . 
` He suspected me at every instant . 
In fear and trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him , that he might see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive . ' 
Those are his own words . 
I wrote them down and I remember them . 
` When he began shouting at me , I would fall on my knees . ' 
`` He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his master , ever since he had restored him some money he had lost . 
So it may be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having deceived his master , whom he loved as his benefactor . 
Persons severely afflicted with epilepsy are , so the most skilful doctors tell us , always prone to continual and morbid self-reproach . 
