`` Oh , undoubtedly , '' replied the prosecutor . 
His tone was somewhat cold , compared with Nikolay Parfenovitch 's impulsiveness . 
I will note once for all that Nikolay Parfenovitch , who had but lately arrived among us , had from the first felt marked respect for Ippolit Kirillovitch , our prosecutor , and had become almost his bosom friend . 
He was almost the only person who put implicit faith in Ippolit Kirillovitch 's extraordinary talents as a psychologist and orator and in the justice of his grievance . 
He had heard of him in Petersburg . 
On the other hand , young Nikolay Parfenovitch was the only person in the whole world whom our `` unappreciated '' prosecutor genuinely liked . 
On their way to Mokroe they had time to come to an understanding about the present case . 
And now as they sat at the table , the sharp-witted junior caught and interpreted every indication on his senior colleague 's face - half a word , a glance , or a wink . 
`` Gentlemen , only let me tell my own story and do n't interrupt me with trivial questions and I 'll tell you everything in a moment , '' said Mitya excitedly . 
`` Excellent ! 
Thank you . 
But before we proceed to listen to your communication , will you allow me to inquire as to another little fact of great interest to us ? 
I mean the ten roubles you borrowed yesterday at about five o'clock on the security of your pistols , from your friend , Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin . '' 
`` I pledged them , gentlemen . 
I pledged them for ten roubles . 
What more ? 
That 's all about it . 
As soon as I got back to town I pledged them . '' 
`` You got back to town ? 
Then you had been out of town ? '' 
`` Yes , I went a journey of forty versts into the country . 
Did n't you know ? '' 
The prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch exchanged glances . 
`` Well , how would it be if you began your story with a systematic description of all you did yesterday , from the morning onwards ? 
Allow us , for instance , to inquire why you were absent from the town , and just when you left and when you came back - all those facts . '' 
`` You should have asked me like that from the beginning , '' cried Mitya , laughing aloud , `` and , if you like , we wo n't begin from yesterday , but from the morning of the day before ; then you 'll understand how , why , and where I went . 
I went the day before yesterday , gentlemen , to a merchant of the town , called Samsonov , to borrow three thousand roubles from him on safe security . 
It was a pressing matter , gentlemen , it was a sudden necessity . '' 
`` Allow me to interrupt you , '' the prosecutor put in politely . 
`` Why were you in such pressing need for just that sum , three thousand ? '' 
`` Oh , gentlemen , you need n't go into details , how , when and why , and why just so much money , and not so much , and all that rigmarole . 
Why , it 'll run to three volumes , and then you 'll want an epilogue ! '' 
Mitya said all this with the good-natured but impatient familiarity of a man who is anxious to tell the whole truth and is full of the best intentions . 
`` Gentlemen ! '' 
- he corrected himself hurriedly - `` do n't be vexed with me for my restiveness , I beg you again . 
Believe me once more , I feel the greatest respect for you and understand the true position of affairs . 
Do n't think I 'm drunk . 
I 'm quite sober now . 
And , besides , being drunk would be no hindrance . 
It 's with me , you know , like the saying : ` When he is sober , he is a fool ; when he is drunk , he is a wise man . ' 
Ha ha ! 
But I see , gentlemen , it 's not the proper thing to make jokes to you , till we 've had our explanation , I mean . 
And I 've my own dignity to keep up , too . 
I quite understand the difference for the moment . 
I am , after all , in the position of a criminal , and so , far from being on equal terms with you . 
And it 's your business to watch me . 
I ca n't expect you to pat me on the head for what I did to Grigory , for one ca n't break old men 's heads with impunity . 
I suppose you 'll put me away for him for six months , or a year perhaps , in a house of correction . 
I do n't know what the punishment is - but it will be without loss of the rights of my rank , without loss of my rank , wo n't it ? 
So you see , gentlemen , I understand the distinction between us ... . 
But you must see that you could puzzle God Himself with such questions . 
` How did you step ? 
Where did you step ? 
When did you step ? 
And on what did you step ? ' 
I shall get mixed up , if you go on like this , and you will put it all down against me . 
And what will that lead to ? 
To nothing ! 
And even if it 's nonsense I 'm talking now , let me finish , and you , gentlemen , being men of honour and refinement , will forgive me ! 
I 'll finish by asking you , gentlemen , to drop that conventional method of questioning . 
I mean , beginning from some miserable trifle , how I got up , what I had for breakfast , how I spat , and where I spat , and so distracting the attention of the criminal , suddenly stun him with an overwhelming question , ` Whom did you murder ? 
Whom did you rob ? ' 
Ha-ha ! 
That 's your regulation method , that 's where all your cunning comes in . 
You can put peasants off their guard like that , but not me . 
I know the tricks . 
I 've been in the service , too . 
Ha ha ha ! 
You 're not angry , gentlemen ? 
You forgive my impertinence ? '' 
he cried , looking at them with a good-nature that was almost surprising . 
`` It 's only Mitya Karamazov , you know , so you can overlook it . 
It would be inexcusable in a sensible man ; but you can forgive it in Mitya . 
Ha ha ! '' 
Nikolay Parfenovitch listened , and laughed too . 
Though the prosecutor did not laugh , he kept his eyes fixed keenly on Mitya , as though anxious not to miss the least syllable , the slightest movement , the smallest twitch of any feature of his face . 
`` That 's how we have treated you from the beginning , '' said Nikolay Parfenovitch , still laughing . 
`` We have n't tried to put you out by asking how you got up in the morning and what you had for breakfast . 
We began , indeed , with questions of the greatest importance . '' 
`` I understand . 
I saw it and appreciated it , and I appreciate still more your present kindness to me , an unprecedented kindness , worthy of your noble hearts . 
We three here are gentlemen and let everything be on the footing of mutual confidence between educated , well-bred people , who have the common bond of noble birth and honour . 
In any case , allow me to look upon you as my best friends at this moment of my life , at this moment when my honour is assailed . 
That 's no offence to you , gentlemen , is it ? '' 
On the contrary . 
You 've expressed all that so well , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Nikolay Parfenovitch answered with dignified approbation . 
`` And enough of those trivial questions , gentlemen , all those tricky questions ! 
cried Mitya enthusiastically . 
`` Or there 's simply no knowing where we shall get to ! 
Is there ? '' 
`` I will follow your sensible advice entirely , '' the prosecutor interposed , addressing Mitya . 
`` I do n't withdraw my question , however . 
It is now vitally important for us to know exactly why you needed that sum , I mean precisely three thousand . '' 
`` Why I needed it ? 
... Oh , for one thing and another ... . 
Well , it was to pay a debt . '' 
`` A debt to whom ? '' 
`` That I absolutely refuse to answer , gentlemen . 
Not because I could n't , or because I should n't dare , or because it would be damaging , for it 's all a paltry matter and absolutely trifling , but - I wo n't , because it 's a matter of principle : that 's my private life , and I wo n't allow any intrusion into my private life . 
That 's my principle . 
