asked Alyosha . 
`` Why do I whisper ? 
Deuce take it '' cried Dmitri at the top of his voice . 
`` You see what silly tricks nature plays one . 
I am here in secret , and on the watch . 
I 'll explain later on , but , knowing it 's a secret , I began whispering like a fool , when there 's no need . 
Let us go . 
Over there . 
Till then be quiet . 
I want to kiss you . 
Glory to God in the world , Glory to God in me ... I was just repeating that , sitting here , before you came . '' 
The garden was about three acres in extent , and planted with trees only along the fence at the four sides . 
There were apple-trees , maples , limes and birch-trees . 
The middle of the garden was an empty grass space , from which several hundredweight of hay was carried in the summer . 
The garden was let out for a few roubles for the summer . 
There were also plantations of raspberries and currants and gooseberries laid out along the sides ; a kitchen garden had been planted lately near the house . 
Dmitri led his brother to the most secluded corner of the garden . 
There , in a thicket of lime-trees and old bushes of black currant , elder , snowball-tree , and lilac , there stood a tumbledown green summer-house ; blackened with age . 
Its walls were of lattice-work , but there was still a roof which could give shelter . 
God knows when this summer-house was built . 
There was a tradition that it had been put up some fifty years before by a retired colonel called von Schmidt , who owned the house at that time . 
It was all in decay , the floor was rotting , the planks were loose , the woodwork smelled musty . 
In the summer-house there was a green wooden table fixed in the ground , and round it were some green benches upon which it was still possible to sit . 
Alyosha had at once observed his brother 's exhilarated condition , and on entering the arbour he saw half a bottle of brandy and a wineglass on the table . 
`` That 's brandy , '' Mitya laughed . 
`` I see your look : ` He 's drinking again '' Distrust the apparition . 
Distrust the worthless , lying crowd , And lay aside thy doubts . 
I 'm not drinking , I 'm only ` indulging , ' as that pig , your Rakitin , says . 
He 'll be a civil councillor one day , but he 'll always talk about ` indulging . ' 
Sit down . 
I could take you in my arms , Alyosha , and press you to my bosom till I crush you , for in the whole world - in reality - in real-i-ty - -LRB- can you take it in ? -RRB- 
I love no one but you ! 
He uttered the last words in a sort of exaltation . 
`` No one but you and one ` jade ' I have fallen in love with , to my ruin . 
But being in love does n't mean loving . 
You may be in love with a woman and yet hate her . 
Remember that ! 
I can talk about it gaily still . 
Sit down here by the table and I 'll sit beside you and look at you , and go on talking . 
You shall keep quiet and I 'll go on talking , for the time has come . 
But on reflection , you know , I 'd better speak quietly , for here - here - you can never tell what ears are listening . 
I will explain everything ; as they say , ` the story will be continued . ' 
Why have I been longing for you ? 
Why have I been thirsting for you all these days , and just now ? 
-LRB- It 's five days since I 've cast anchor here . -RRB- 
Because it 's only to you I can tell everything ; because I must , because I need you , because to-morrow I shall fly from the clouds , because to-morrow life is ending and beginning . 
Have you ever felt , have you ever dreamt of falling down a precipice into a pit ? 
That 's just how I 'm falling , but not in a dream . 
And I 'm not afraid , and do n't you be afraid . 
At least , I am afraid , but I enjoy it . 
It 's not enjoyment though , but ecstasy . 
Damn it all , whatever it is ! 
A strong spirit , a weak spirit , a womanish spirit - what , ever it is ! 
Let us praise nature : you see what sunshine , how clear the sky is , the leaves are all green , it 's still summer ; four o'clock in the afternoon and the stillness ! 
Where were you going ? '' 
`` I was going to father 's , but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna 's first . '' 
`` To her , and to father ! 
Oo ! 
what a coincidence ! 
Why was I waiting for you ? 
Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and even in my ribs ? 
Why , to send you to father and to her , Katerina Ivanovna , so as to have done with her and with father . 
To send an angel . 
I might have sent anyone , but I wanted to send an angel . 
And here you are on your way to see father and her . '' 
`` Did you really mean to send me ? '' 
cried Alyosha with a distressed expression . 
`` Stay ! 
You knew it And I see you understand it all at once . 
But be quiet , be quiet for a time . 
Do n't be sorry , and do n't cry . '' 
Dmitri stood up , thought a moment , and put his finger to his forehead . 
`` She 's asked you , written to you a letter or something , that 's why you 're going to her ? 
You would n't be going except for that ? '' 
`` Here is her note . '' 
Alyosha took it out of his pocket . 
Mitya looked through it quickly . 
`` And you were going the backway ! 
Oh , gods , I thank you for sending him by the backway , and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly old fishermen in the fable ! 
Listen , Alyosha , listen , brother ! 
Now I mean to tell you everything , for I must tell someone . 
An angel in heaven I 've told already ; but I want to tell an angel on earth . 
You are an angel on earth . 
You will hear and judge and forgive . 
And that 's what I need , that someone above me should forgive . 
Listen ! 
If two people break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown , or at least one of them , and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to someone else and says , ` Do this for me ' - some favour never asked before that could only be asked on one 's deathbed - would that other refuse , if he were a friend or a brother ? '' 
`` I will do it , but tell me what it is , and make haste , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste ! 
H 'm ! 
... Do n't be in a hurry , Alyosha , you hurry and worry yourself . 
There 's no need to hurry now . 
Now the world has taken a new turning . 
Ah , Alyosha , what a pity you ca n't understand ecstasy . 
But what am I saying to him ? 
As though you did n't understand it . 
What an ass I am ! 
What am I saying ? 
` Be noble , O man ! ' 
- who says that ? '' 
