Answering certain questions about Grushenka and carried away by the loftiness of his own sentiments and his success , of which he was , of course , conscious , he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of Agrafena Alexandrovna as `` the kept mistress of Samsonov . '' 
He would have given a good deal to take back his words afterwards , for Fetyukovitch caught him out over it at once . 
And it was all because Rakitin had not reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately acquainted with every detail in so short a time . 
`` Allow me to ask , '' began the counsel for the defence , with the most affable and even respectful smile , `` you are , of course , the same Mr. Rakitin whose pamphlet , The Life of the Deceased Elder , Father Zossima , published by the diocesan authorities , full of profound and religious reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout dedication to the bishop , I have just read with such pleasure ? '' 
`` I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards , '' muttered Rakitin , for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost ashamed . 
`` Oh , that 's excellent ! 
A thinker like you can , and indeed ought to , take the widest view of every social question . 
Your most instructive pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the bishop , and has been of appreciable service ... . 
But this is the chief thing I should like to learn from you . 
You stated just now that you were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov . '' 
-LRB- It must be noted that Grushenka 's surname was Svyetlov . 
I heard it for the first time that day , during the case . -RRB- 
`` I can not answer for all my acquaintances ... . 
I am a young man ... and who can be responsible for everyone he meets ? '' 
cried Rakitin , flushing all over . 
`` I understand , I quite understand , '' cried Fetyukovitch ; as though he , too , were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself . 
`` You , like any other , might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and beautiful woman who would readily entertain the elite of the youth of the neighbourhood , but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my knowledge , that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and promised you twenty-five roubles , if you would bring him to her in his monastic dress . 
And that actually took place on the evening of the day on which the terrible crime , which is the subject of the present investigation , was committed . 
You brought Alexey Karamazov to Madame Svyetlov , and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from Madame Svyetlov as a reward , that 's what I wanted to hear from you ? '' 
`` It was a joke ... . 
I do n't , see of what interest that can be to you ... . 
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later ... '' `` Then you did take - but you have not given it back yet ... or have you ? '' 
`` That 's of no consequence , '' muttered Rakitin , `` I refuse to answer such questions ... . 
Of course , I shall give it back . '' 
The President intervened , but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more questions to ask of the witness . 
Mr. Rakitin left the witness-box not absolutely without a stain upon his character . 
The effect left by the lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred , and Fetyukovitch 's expression , as he watched him walk away , seemed to suggest to the public `` this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him . '' 
I remember that this incident , too , did not pass off without an outbreak from Mitya . 
Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred to Grushenka , he suddenly shouted `` Bernard ! '' 
When , after Rakitin 's cross-examination , the President asked the prisoner if he had anything to say , Mitya cried loudly : `` Since I 've been arrested , he has borrowed money from me ! 
He is a contemptible Bernard and opportunist , and he does n't believe in God ; he took the bishop in ! '' 
Mitya of course , was pulled up again for the intemperance of his language , but Rakitin was done for . 
Captain Snegiryov 's evidence was a failure , too , but from quite a different reason . 
He appeared in ragged and dirty clothes , muddy boots , and in spite of the vigilance and expert observation of the police officers , he turned out to be hopelessly drunk . 
On being asked about Mitya 's attack upon him , he refused to answer . 
`` God bless him . 
Ilusha told me not to . 
God will make it up to me yonder . '' 
`` Who told you not to tell ? 
Of whom are you talking ? '' 
`` Ilusha , my little son . 
` Father , father , how he insulted you ! ' 
He said that at the stone . 
Now he is dying ... '' The captain suddenly began sobbing , and plumped down on His knees before the President . 
He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of the public . 
The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at all . 
Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity , and amazed people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case . 
Thus , for example , Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression , of course , very prejudicial to Mitya . 
He calculated almost on his fingers that on his first visit to Mokroe , Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles , `` or very little less . 
Just think what he squandered on those gypsy girls alone ! 
And as for our lousy peasants , it was n't a case of flinging half a rouble in the street , he made them presents of twenty-five roubles each , at least , he did n't give them less . 
And what a lot of money was simply stolen from him ! 
And if anyone did steal , he did not leave a receipt . 
How could one catch the thief when he was flinging his money away all the time ? 
Our peasants are robbers , you know ; they have no care for their souls . 
And the way he went on with the girls , our village girls ! 
They 're completely set up since then , I tell you , they used to be poor . '' 
He recalled , in fact , every item of expense and added it all up . 
So the theory that only fifteen hundred had been spent and the rest had been put aside in a little bag seemed inconceivable . 
`` I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands , I saw it with my own eyes ; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money , '' cried Trifon Borissovitch , doing his best to satisfy `` his betters . '' 
When Fetyukovitch had to cross-examine him , he scarcely tried to refute his evidence , but began asking him about an incident at the first carousal at Mokroe , a month before the arrest , when Timofey and another peasant called Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred roubles dropped by Mitya when he was drunk , and had given them to Trifon Borissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so . 
`` Well , '' asked the lawyer , '' did you give that hundred roubles back to Mr. Karamazov ? '' 
Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain ... . 
He was obliged , after the peasants had been examined , to admit the finding of the hundred roubles , only adding that he had religiously returned it all to Dmitri Fyodorovitch `` in perfect honesty , and it 's only because his honour was in liquor at the time , he would n't remember it . '' 
But , as he had denied the incident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had been called to prove it , his evidence as to returning the money to Mitya was naturally regarded with great suspicion . 
So one of the most dangerous witnesses brought forward by the prosecution was again discredited . 
The same thing happened with the Poles . 
They took up an attitude of pride and independence ; they vociferated loudly that they had both been in the service of the Crown , and that `` Pan Mitya '' had offered them three thousand `` to buy their honour , '' and that they had seen a large sum of money in his hands . 
Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number of Polish words into his sentences , and seeing that this only increased his consequence in the eyes of the President and the prosecutor , grew more and more pompous , and ended by talking in Polish altogether . 
But Fetyukovitch caught them , too , in his snares . 
Trifon Borissovitch , recalled , was forced , in spite of his evasions , to admit that Pan Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he had provided , and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game . 
Kalgonov confirmed this , and both the Poles left the witness-box with damaged reputations , amidst laughter from the public . 
Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous witnesses . 
Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them , and dismissing them with a certain derision . 
The lawyers and experts were lost in admiration , and were only at a loss to understand what good purpose could be served by it , for all , I repeat , felt that the case for the prosecution could not be refuted , but was growing more and more tragically overwhelming . 
But from the confidence of the `` great magician '' they saw that he was serene , and they waited , feeling that `` such a man '' had not come from Petersburg for nothing , and that he was not a man to return unsuccessful . 
The Medical Experts and a Pound of Nuts THE evidence of the medical experts , too , was of little use to the prisoner . 
And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much upon it . 
The medical line of defence had only been taken up through the insistence of Katerina Ivanovna , who had sent for a celebrated doctor from Moscow on purpose . 
The case for the defence could , of course , lose nothing by it and might , with luck , gain something from it . 
There was , however , an element of comedy about it , through the difference of opinion of the doctors . 
The medical experts were the famous doctor from Moscow , our doctor , Herzenstube , and the young doctor , Varvinsky . 
The two latter appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution . 
The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor Herzenstube . 
He was a grey and bald old man of seventy , of middle height and sturdy build . 
He was much esteemed and respected by everyone in the town . 
He was a conscientious doctor and an excellent and pious man , a Hernguter or Moravian brother , I am not quite sure which . 
He had been living amongst us for many years and behaved with wonderful dignity . 
He was a kind-hearted and humane man . 
He treated the sick poor and peasants for nothing , visited them in their slums and huts , and left money for medicine , but he was as obstinate as a mule . 
If once he had taken an idea into his head , there was no shaking it . 
Almost everyone in the town was aware , by the way , that the famous doctor had , within the first two or three days of his presence among us , uttered some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor Herzenstube 's qualifications . 
Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty-five roubles for a visit , several people in the town were glad to take advantage of his arrival , and rushed to consult him regardless of expense . 
All these had , of course , been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube , and the celebrated doctor had criticised his treatment with extreme harshness . 
Finally , he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them , `` Well , who has been cramming you with nostrums ? 
Herzenstube ? 
He he ! '' 
Doctor Herzenstube , of course , heard all this , and now all the three doctors made their appearance , one after another , to be examined . 
Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the prisoner 's mental faculties was self-evident . 
Then giving his grounds for this opinion , which I omit here , he added that the abnormality was not only evident in many of the prisoner 's actions in the past , but was apparent even now at this very moment . 
