`` Well , I know nothing of it so far , and ca n't understand it , and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there . 
The question is , whether that 's due to men 's bad qualities or whether it 's inherent in their nature . 
To my thinking , Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth . 
He was God . 
But we are not gods . 
Suppose I , for instance , suffer intensely . 
Another can never know how much I suffer , because he is another and not I. And what 's more , a man is rarely ready to admit another 's suffering -LRB- as though it were a distinction -RRB- . 
Why wo n't he admit it , do you think ? 
Because I smell unpleasant , because I have a stupid face , because I once trod on his foot . 
Besides , there is suffering and suffering ; degrading , humiliating suffering such as humbles me - hunger , for instance - my benefactor will perhaps allow me ; but when you come to higher suffering - for an idea , for instance - he will very rarely admit that , perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea . 
And so he deprives me instantly of his favour , and not at all from badness of heart . 
Beggars , especially genteel beggars , ought never to show themselves , but to ask for charity through the newspapers . 
One can love one 's neighbours in the abstract , or even at a distance , but at close quarters it 's almost impossible . 
If it were as on the stage , in the ballet , where if beggars come in , they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully , then one might like looking at them . 
But even then we should not love them . 
But enough of that . 
I simply wanted to show you my point of view . 
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally , but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children . 
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be . 
Still we 'd better keep to the children , though it does weaken my case . 
But , in the first place , children can be loved even at close quarters , even when they are dirty , even when they are ugly -LRB- I fancy , though , children never are ugly -RRB- . 
The second reason why I wo n't speak of grown-up people is that , besides being disgusting and unworthy of love , they have a compensation - they 've eaten the apple and know good and evil , and they have become ` like gods . ' 
They go on eating it still . 
But the children have n't eaten anything , and are so far innocent . 
Are you fond of children , Alyosha ? 
I know you are , and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them . 
If they , too , suffer horribly on earth , they must suffer for their fathers ' sins , they must be punished for their fathers , who have eaten the apple ; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth . 
The innocent must not suffer for another 's sins , and especially such innocents ! 
You may be surprised at me , Alyosha , but I am awfully fond of children , too . 
And observe , cruel people , the violent , the rapacious , the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children . 
Children while they are quite little - up to seven , for instance - are so remote from grown-up people they are different creatures , as it were , of a different species . 
I knew a criminal in prison who had , in the course of his career as a burglar , murdered whole families , including several children . 
But when he was in prison , he had a strange affection for them . 
He spent all his time at his window , watching the children playing in the prison yard . 
He trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends with him ... . 
You do n't know why I am telling you all this , Alyosha ? 
My head aches and I am sad . '' 
`` You speak with a strange air , '' observed Alyosha uneasily , `` as though you were not quite yourself . '' 
`` By the way , a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow , '' Ivan went on , seeming not to hear his brother 's words , `` told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs . 
They burn villages , murder , outrage women and children , they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences , leave them so till morning , and in the morning they hang them - all sorts of things you ca n't imagine . 
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty , but that 's a great injustice and insult to the beasts ; a beast can never be so cruel as a man , so artistically cruel . 
The tiger only tears and gnaws , that 's all he can do . 
He would never think of nailing people by the ears , even if he were able to do it . 
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children , - too ; cutting the unborn child from the mothers womb , and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers ' eyes . 
Doing it before the mothers ' eyes was what gave zest to the amusement . 
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting . 
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms , a circle of invading Turks around her . 
They 've planned a diversion : they pet the baby , laugh to make it laugh . 
They succeed , the baby laughs . 
At that moment a Turk points a pistol four inches from the baby 's face . 
The baby laughs with glee , holds out its little hands to the pistol , and he pulls the trigger in the baby 's face and blows out its brains . 
Artistic , was n't it ? 
By the way , Turks are particularly fond of sweet things , they say . '' 
`` Brother , what are you driving at ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I think if the devil does n't exist , but man has created him , he has created him in his own image and likeness . '' 
`` Just as he did God , then ? '' 
observed Alyosha . '' 
` It 's wonderful how you can turn words , ' as Polonius says in Hamlet , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` You turn my words against me . 
Well , I am glad . 
Yours must be a fine God , if man created Him in his image and likeness . 
You asked just now what I was driving at . 
You see , I am fond of collecting certain facts , and , would you believe , I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books , and I 've already got a fine collection . 
The Turks , of course , have gone into it , but they are foreigners . 
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks . 
You know we prefer beating - rods and scourges - that 's our national institution . 
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us , for we are , after all , Europeans . 
But the rod and the scourge we have always with us and they can not be taken from us . 
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating . 
Manners are more humane , or laws have been passed , so that they do n't dare to flog men now . 
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours . 
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us , though I believe we are being inoculated with it , since the religious movement began in our aristocracy . 
I have a charming pamphlet , translated from the French , describing how , quite recently , five years ago , a murderer , Richard , was executed - a young man , I believe , of three and twenty , who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold . 
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains . 
They brought him up to work for them . 
He grew up like a little wild beast among them . 
The shepherds taught him nothing , and scarcely fed or clothed him , but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet , and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so . 
Quite the contrary , they thought they had every right , for Richard had been given to them as a chattel , and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him . 
Richard himself describes how in those years , like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel , he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs , which were fattened for sale . 
But they would n't even give that , and beat him when he stole from the pigs . 
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth , till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief . 
The savage began to earn his living as a day labourer in Geneva . 
He drank what he earned , he lived like a brute , and finished by killing and robbing an old man . 
He was caught , tried , and condemned to death . 
They are not sentimentalists there . 
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors , members of Christian brotherhoods , philanthropic ladies , and the like . 
They taught him to read and write in prison , and expounded the Gospel to him . 
They exhorted him , worked upon him , drummed at him incessantly , till at last he solemnly confessed his crime . 
He was converted . 
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster , but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace . 
All Geneva was in excitement about him - all philanthropic and religious Geneva . 
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison , kissed Richard and embraced him ; ` You are our brother , you have found grace . ' 
And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion , ` Yes , I 've found grace ! 
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs ' food , but now even I have found grace . 
I am dying in the Lord . ' 
` Yes , Richard , die in the Lord ; you have shed blood and must die . 
Though it 's not your fault that you knew not the Lord , when you coveted the pigs ' food and were beaten for stealing it -LRB- which was very wrong of you , for stealing is forbidden -RRB- ; but you 've shed blood and you must die . 
` And on the last day , Richard , perfectly limp , did nothing but cry and repeat every minute : ` This is my happiest day . 
I am going to the Lord . ' 
