Mind you do come . 
I shall always be glad to see you . 
Well , Christ be with you ! '' 
Ivan got into the carriage . 
`` Good-bye , Ivan ! 
Do n't be too hard on me ! '' 
the father called for the last time . 
The whole household came out to take leave - Smerdyakov , Marfa and Grigory . 
Ivan gave them ten roubles each . 
When he had seated himself in the carriage , Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug . 
`` You see ... I am going to Tchermashnya , '' broke suddenly from Ivan . 
Again , as the day before , the words seemed to drop of themselves , and he laughed , too , a peculiar , nervous laugh . 
He remembered it long after . 
`` It 's a true saying then , that ` it 's always worth while speaking to a clever man , ' '' answered Smerdyakov firmly , looking significantly at Ivan . 
The carriage rolled away . 
Nothing was clear in Ivan 's soul , but he looked eagerly around him at the fields , at the hills , at the trees , at a flock of geese flying high overhead in the bright sky . 
And all of a sudden he felt very happy . 
He tried to talk to the driver , and he felt intensely interested in an answer the peasant made him ; but a minute later he realised that he was not catching anything , and that he had not really even taken in the peasant 's answer . 
He was silent , and it was pleasant even so . 
The air was pure and cool , sky bright . 
The images of Alyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind . 
But he softly smiled , blew softly on the friendly phantoms , and they flew away . 
`` There 's plenty of time for them , '' he thought . 
They reached the station quickly , changed horses , and galloped to Volovya `` Why is it worth while speaking to a clever man ? 
What did he mean by that ? '' 
The thought seemed suddenly to clutch at his breathing . 
`` And why did I tell him I was going to Tchermashnya ? '' 
They reached Volovya station . 
Ivan got out of the carriage , and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelve versts to Tchermashnya . 
He told them to harness the horses . 
He went into the station house , looked round , glanced at the overseer 's wife , and suddenly went back to the entrance . 
`` I wo n't go to Tchermashnya . 
Am I too late to reach the railway by seven , brothers ? '' 
`` We shall just do it . 
Shall we get the carriage out ? '' 
`` At once . 
Will any one of you be going to the town to-morrow ? '' 
`` To be sure . 
Mitri here will . '' 
`` Can you do me a service , Mitri ? 
Go to my father 's , to Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , and tell him I have n't gone to Tchermashnya . 
Can you ? '' 
`` Of course I can . 
I 've known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time . '' 
`` And here 's something for you , for I dare say he wo n't give you anything , '' said Ivan , laughing gaily . 
`` You may depend on it he wo n't . '' 
Mitri laughed too . 
`` Thank you , sir . 
I 'll be sure to do it . '' 
At seven o'clock Ivan got into the train and set off to Moscow . 
`` Away with the past . 
I 've done with the old world for ever , and may I have no news , no echo , from it . 
To a new life , new places , and no looking back ! '' 
But instead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom , and his heart ached with such anguish , as he had never known in his life before . 
He was thinking all the night . 
The train flew on , and only at daybreak , when he was approaching Moscow , he suddenly roused himself from his meditation . 
`` I am a scoundrel , '' he whispered to himself . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off . 
For two hours afterwards he felt almost happy , and sat drinking brandy . 
But suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for everyone in the house , and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch 's equanimity at once . 
Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell down from the top of the steps . 
Fortunately , Marfa Ignatyevna was in the yard and heard him in time . 
She did not see the fall , but heard his scream - the strange , peculiar scream , long familiar to her - the scream of the epileptic falling in a fit . 
They could not tell whether the fit had come on him at the moment he was decending the steps , so that he must have fallen unconscious , or whether it was the fall and the shock that had caused the fit in Smerdyakov , who was known to be liable to them . 
They found him at the bottom of the cellar steps , writhing in convulsions and foaming at the mouth . 
It was thought at first that he must have broken something - an arm or a leg - and hurt himself , but `` God had preserved him , '' as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it - nothing of the kind had happened . 
But it was difficult to get him out of the cellar . 
They asked the neighbours to help and managed it somehow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the whole ceremony . 
He helped , evidently alarmed and upset . 
The sick man did not regain consciousness ; the convulsions ceased for a time , but then began again , and everyone concluded that the same thing would happen , as had happened a year before , when he accidently fell from the garret . 
They remembered that ice been put on his head then . 
There was still ice in the cellar , and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up . 
In the evening , Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube , who arrived at once . 
He was a most estimable old man , and the most careful and conscientious doctor in the province . 
After careful examination , he concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious consequences ; that meanwhile he , Herzenstube , did not fully understand it , but that by to-morrow morning , if the present remedies were unavailing , he would venture to try something else . 
The invalid was taken to the lodge , to a room next to Grigory 's and Marfa Ignatyevna 's . 
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that day . 
Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner , and the soup , compared with Smerdyakov 's , was `` no better than dish-water , '' and the fowl was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it . 
To her master 's bitter , though deserved , reproaches , Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very old one to begin with , and that she had never been trained as a cook . 
In the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch ; he was informed that Grigory , who had not been well for the last three days , was completely laid up by his lumbago . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house . 
He was in terrible excitement and suspense . 
That evening he reckoned on Grushenka 's coming almost as a certainty . 
He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an assurance `` that she had promised to come without fail . '' 
The incorrigible old man 's heart throbbed with excitement ; he paced up and down his empty rooms listening . 
He had to be on the alert . 
Dmitri might be on the watch for her somewhere , and when she knocked on the window -LRB- Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock -RRB- the door must be opened at once . 
She must not be a second in the passage , for fear which God forbid ! 
- that she should be frightened and run away . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of , but never had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes . 
This time he could say almost certainly that she would come ! 
The Russian Monk . 
Father Zossima and His Visitors WHEN with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder 's cell , he stood still almost astonished . 
Instead of a sick man at his last gasp , perhaps unconscious , as he had feared to find him , he saw him sitting up in his chair and , though weak and exhausted , his face was bright and cheerful , he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful conversation . 
But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hour before Alyosha 's arrival ; his visitors had gathered together in his cell earlier , waiting for him to wake , having received a most confident assurance from Father Paissy that `` the teacher would get up , and as he had himself promised in the morning , converse once more with those dear to his heart . '' 
This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder Father Paissy put implicit trust in . 
If he had seen him unconscious , if he had seen him breathe his last , and yet had his promise that he would rise up and say good-bye to him , he would not have believed perhaps even in death , but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfil his promise . 
In the morning as he lay down to sleep , Father Zossima had told him positively : `` I shall not die without the delight of another conversation with you , beloved of my heart . 
I shall look once more on your dear face and pour out my heart to you once again . '' 
