cried Alyosha . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will send you as much more as you need , and you know , I have money too , take what you want , as you would from a brother , from a friend , you can give it back later ... -LRB- You 'll get rich . 
you 'll get rich ! -RRB- 
And you know you could n't have a better idea than to move to another province ! 
It would be the saving of you , especially of your boy and you ought to go quickly , before the winter , before the cold . 
You must write to us when you are there , and we will always be brothers ... No , it 's not a dream ! '' 
Alyosha could have hugged him , he was so pleased . 
But glancing at him he stopped short . 
The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his lips protruding , with a pale and frenzied face . 
His lips were moving as though trying to articulate something ; no sound came , but still his lips moved . 
It was uncanny . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Alyosha , startled . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I. . . 
you , '' muttered the captain , faltering , looking at him with a strange , wild , fixed stare , and an air of desperate resolution . 
At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips . 
`` I. . . 
you , sir ... would n't you like me to show you a little trick I know ? '' 
he murmured , suddenly , in a firm rapid whisper , his voice no longer faltering . 
`` What trick ? '' 
`` A pretty trick , '' whispered the captain . 
His mouth was twisted on the left side , his left eye was screwed up . 
He still stared at Alyosha . 
`` What is the matter ? 
What trick ? '' 
Alyosha cried , now thoroughly alarmed . 
`` Why , look , '' squealed the captain suddenly , and showing him the two notes which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger during the conversation , he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them tight in his right hand . 
`` Do you see , do you see ? '' 
he shrieked , pale and infuriated . 
And suddenly flinging up his hand , he threw the crumpled notes on the sand . 
`` Do you see ? '' 
he shrieked again , pointing to them . 
`` Look there ! '' 
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel , gasping and exclaiming as he did so : `` So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! '' 
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha , and his whole figure expressed unutterable pride . 
`` Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honour , '' he cried , raising his arm in the air . 
Then he turned quickly and began to run ; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and kissed his hand to Alyosha . 
He ran another five paces and then turned round for the last time . 
This time his face was not contorted with laughter , but quivering all over with tears . 
In a tearful , faltering , sobbing voice he cried : `` What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame ? '' 
And then he ran on without turning . 
Alyosha looked after him , inexpressibly grieved . 
Oh , he saw that till the very last moment the man had not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes . 
He did not turn back . 
Alyosha knew he would not . 
He would not follow him and call him back , he knew why . 
When he was out of sight , Alyosha picked up the two notes . 
They were very much crushed and crumpled , and had been pressed into the sand , but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyosha unfolded them and smoothed them out . 
After smoothing them out , he folded them up , put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report on the success of her commission . 
Pro and Contra The Engagement MADAME HOHLAKOV was again the first to meet Alyosha . 
She was flustered ; something important had happened . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's hysterics had ended in a fainting fit , and then `` a terrible , awful weakness had followed , she lay with her eyes turned up and was delirious . 
Now she was in a fever . 
They had sent for Herzenstube ; they had sent for the aunts . 
The aunts were already here , but Herzenstube had not yet come . 
They were all sitting in her room , waiting . 
She was unconscious now , and what if it turned to brain fever ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed . 
`` This is serious , serious , '' she added at every word , as though nothing that had happened to her before had been serious . 
Alyosha listened with distress , and was beginning to describe his adventures , but she interrupted him at the first words . 
She had not time to listen . 
She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for her there . 
`` Lise , '' she whispered almost in his ear , `` Lise has greatly surprised me just now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
She touched me , too , and so my heart forgives her everything . 
Only fancy , as soon as you had gone , she began to be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to-day and yesterday , though she was not laughing at you , but only joking . 
But she was seriously sorry for it , almost ready to cry , so that I was quite surprised . 
She has never been really sorry for laughing at me , but has only made a joke of it . 
And you know she is laughing at me every minute . 
But this time she was in earnest She thinks a great deal of your opinion , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and do n't take offence or be wounded by her if you can help it . 
I am never hard upon her , for she 's such a clever little thing . 
Would you believe it ? 
She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood , ` the greatest friend of her childhood ' - just think of that - ` greatest friend ' - and what about me ? 
She has very strong feelings and memories , and , what 's more , she uses these phrases , most unexpected words , which come out all of a sudden when you least expect them . 
She spoke lately about a pine-tree , for instance : there used to be a pine-tree standing in our garden in her early childhood . 
Very likely it 's standing there still ; so there 's no need to speak in the past tense . 
Pine-trees are not like people , Alexey Fyodorovitch , they do n't change quickly . 
` Mamma , ' she said , ' I remember this pine tree as in a dream , ' only she said something so original about it that I ca n't repeat it . 
Besides , I 've forgotten it . 
Well , good-bye ! 
I am so worried I feel I shall go out of my mind . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 've been out of my mind twice in my life . 
Go to Lise , cheer her up , as you always can so charmingly . 
Lise , '' she cried , going to her door , `` here I 've brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch , whom you insulted so . 
He is not at all angry , I assure you ; on the contrary , he is surprised that you could suppose so . '' 
`` Merci , maman . 
Come in , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
Alyosha went in . 
Lise looked rather embarrassed , and at once flushed crimson . 
She was evidently ashamed of something , and , as people always do in such cases , she began immediately talking of other things , as though they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment . 
`` Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she told me all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know , although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing to another ... I cried when I heard . 
Well , did you give him the money and how is that poor man getting on ? '' 
`` The fact is I did n't give it to him , and it 's a long story , '' answered Alyosha , as though he , too , could think of nothing but his regret at having failed , yet Lise saw perfectly well that he , too , looked away , and that he , too , was trying to talk of other things . 
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story , but at the first words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise 's attention as well . 
He spoke with deep feeling , under the influence of the strong impression he had just received , and he succeeded in telling his story well and circumstantially . 
In old days in Moscow he had been fond of coming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him , what he had read , or what he remembered of his childhood . 
Sometimes they had made day-dreams and woven whole romances together - generally cheerful and amusing ones . 
