Smurov picked it up and carried it after him . 
All the boys were crying , and Kolya and the boy who discovered about Troy most of all . 
Though Smurov , with the captain 's hat in his hand , was crying bitterly too , he managed , as he ran , to snatch up a piece of red brick that lay on the snow of the path , to fling it at the flock of sparrows that was flying by . 
He missed them , of course , and went on crying as he ran . 
Half-way , Snegiryov suddenly stopped , stood still for half a minute , as though struck by something , and suddenly turning back to the church , ran towards the deserted grave . 
But the boys instantly overtook him and caught hold of him on all sides . 
Then he fell helpless on the snow as though he had been knocked down , and struggling , sobbing , and wailing , he began crying out , `` Ilusha , old man , dear old man ! '' 
Alyosha and Kolya tried to make him get up , soothing and persuading him . 
`` Captain , give over , a brave man must show fortitude , '' muttered Kolya . 
`` You 'll spoil the flowers , '' said Alyosha , and mamma is expecting them , she is sitting crying because you would not give her any before . 
Ilusha 's little bed is still there - '' `` Yes , yes , mamma ! '' 
Snegiryov suddenly recollected , `` they 'll take away the bed , they 'll take it away , '' he added as though alarmed that they really would . 
He jumped up and ran homewards again . 
But it was not far off and they all arrived together . 
Snegiryov opened the door hurriedly and called to his wife with whom he had so cruelly quarrelled just before : `` Mamma , poor crippled darling , Ilusha has sent you these flowers , '' he cried , holding out to her a little bunch of flowers that had been frozen and broken while he was struggling in the snow . 
But at that instant he saw in the corner , by the little bed , Ilusha 's little boots , which the landlady had put tidily side by side . 
Seeing the old , patched , rusty-looking , stiff boots he flung up his hands and rushed to them , fell on his knees , snatched up one boot and , pressing his lips to it , began kissing it greedily , crying , `` Ilusha , old man , dear old man , where are your little feet ? '' 
`` Where have you taken him away ? 
Where have you taken him ? '' 
the lunatic cried in a heart-rending voice . 
Nina , too , broke into sobs . 
Kolya ran out of the room , the boys followed him . 
At last Alyosha too went out . 
`` Let them weep , '' he said to Kolya , `` it 's no use trying to comfort them just now . 
Let wait a minute and then go back . '' 
`` No , it 's no use , it 's awful , '' Kolya assented . 
`` Do you know , Karamazov , '' he dropped his voice so that no one could hear them , `` I feel dreadfully sad , and if it were only possible to bring him back , I 'd give anything in the world to do it . '' 
`` Ah , so would I , '' said Alyosha . 
`` What do you think , Karamazov ? 
Had we better come back here to-night ? 
He 'll be drunk , you know . '' 
`` Perhaps he will . 
Let us come together , you and I , that will be enough , to spend an hour with them , with the mother and Nina . 
If we all come together we shall remind them of everything again , '' Alyosha suggested . 
`` The landlady is laying the table for them now - there 'll be a funeral dinner or something , the priest is coming ; shall we go back to it , Karamazov ? '' 
`` Of course , '' said Alyosha . 
`` It 's all so strange , Karamazov , such sorrow and then pancakes after it , it all seems so unnatural in our religion . '' 
`` They are going to have salmon , too , '' the boy who had discovered about Troy observed in a loud voice . 
`` I beg you most earnestly , Kartashov , not to interrupt again with your idiotic remarks , especially when one is not talking to you and does n't care to know whether you exist or not ! '' 
Kolya snapped out irritably . 
The boy flushed crimson but did not dare to reply . 
Meantime they were strolling slowly along the path and suddenly Smurov exclaimed : `` There 's Ilusha 's stone , under which they wanted to bury him . '' 
They all stood still by the big stone . 
Alyosha looked and the whole picture of what Snegiryov had described to him that day , how Ilusha , weeping and hugging his father , had cried , `` Father , father , how he insulted you , '' rose at once before his imagination . 
A sudden impulse seemed to come into his soul . 
With a serious and earnest expression he looked from one to another of the bright , pleasant faces of Ilusha 's schoolfellows , and suddenly said to them : `` Boys , I should like to say one word to you , here at this place . '' 
The boys stood round him and at once bent attentive and expectant eyes upon him . 
`` Boys , we shall soon part . 
I shall be for some time with my two brothers , of whom one is going to Siberia and the other is lying at death 's door . 
But soon I shall leave this town , perhaps for a long time , so we shall part . 
Let us make a compact here , at Ilusha 's stone , that we will never forget Ilusha and one another . 
And whatever happens to us later in life , if we do n't meet for twenty years afterwards , let us always remember how we buried the poor boy at whom we once threw stones , do you remember , by the bridge ? 
and afterwards we all grew so fond of him . 
He was a fine boy , a kindhearted , brave boy , he felt for his father 's honour and resented the cruel insult to him and stood up for him . 
And so in the first place , we will remember him , boys , all our lives . 
And even if we are occupied with most important things , if we attain to honour or fall into great misfortune - still let us remember how good it was once here , when we were all together , united by a good and kind feeling which made us , for the time we were loving that poor boy , better perhaps than we are . 
My little doves let me call you so , for you are very like them , those pretty blue birds , at this minute as I look at your good dear faces . 
My dear children , perhaps you wo n't understand what I am saying to you , because I often speak very unintelligibly , but you 'll remember all the same and will agree with my words some time . 
You must know that there is nothing higher and stronger and more wholesome and good for life in the future than some good memory , especially a memory of childhood , of home . 
People talk to you a great deal about your education , but some good , sacred memory , preserved from childhood , is perhaps the best education . 
If a man carries many such memories with him into life , he is safe to the end of his days , and if one has only one good memory left in one 's heart , even that may sometime be the means of saving us . 
Perhaps we may even grow wicked later on , may be unable to refrain from a bad action , may laugh at men 's tears and at those people who say as Kolya did just now , ' I want to suffer for all men , ' and may even jeer spitefully at such people . 
But however bad we may become - which God forbid - yet , when we recall how we buried Ilusha , how we loved him in his last days , and how we have been talking like friends all together , at this stone , the cruellest and most mocking of us - if we do become so will not dare to laugh inwardly at having been kind and good at this moment ! 
What 's more , perhaps , that one memory may keep him from great evil and he will reflect and say , ` Yes , I was good and brave and honest then ! ' 
Let him laugh to himself , that 's no matter , a man often laughs at what 's good and kind . 
That 's only from thoughtlessness . 
But I assure you , boys , that as he laughs he will say at once in his heart , ` No , I do wrong to laugh , for that 's not a thing to laugh at . ' 
`` That will be so , I understand you , Karamazov ! '' 
cried Kolya , with flashing eyes . 
The boys were excited and they , too , wanted to say something , but they restrained themselves , looking with intentness and emotion at the speaker . 
`` I say this in case we become bad , '' Alyosha went on , `` but there 's no reason why we should become bad , is there , boys ? 
Let us be , first and above all , kind , then honest and then let us never forget each other ! 
I say that again . 
I give you my word for my part that I 'll never forget one of you . 
Every face looking at me now I shall remember even for thirty years . 
Just now Kolya said to Kartashov that we did not care to know whether he exists or not . 
But I can not forget that Kartashov exists and that he is not blushing now as he did when he discovered the founders of Troy , but is looking at me with his jolly , kind , dear little eyes . 
Boys , my dear boys , let us all be generous and brave like Ilusha , clever , brave and generous like Kolya -LRB- though he will be ever so much cleverer when he is grown up -RRB- , and let us all be as modest , as clever and sweet as Kartashov . 
But why am I talking about those two ? 
You are all dear to me , boys ; from this day forth , I have a place in my heart for you all , and I beg you to keep a place in your hearts for me ! 
Well , and who has united us in this kind , good feeling which we shall remember and intend to remember all our lives ? 
Who , if not Ilusha , the good boy , the dear boy , precious to us for ever ! 
Let us never forget him . 
May his memory live for ever in our hearts from this time forth ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , for ever , for ever ! '' 
the boys cried in their ringing voices , with softened faces . 
`` Let us remember his face and his clothes and his poor little boots , his coffin and his unhappy , sinful father , and how boldly he stood up for him alone against the whole school . '' 
`` We will remember , we will remember , '' cried the boys . 
`` He was brave , he was good ! '' 
`` Ah , how I loved him ! '' 
exclaimed Kolya . 
`` Ah , children , ah , dear friends , do n't be afraid of life ! 
How good life is when one does something good and just ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' the boys repeated enthusiastically . 
`` Karamazov , we love you ! '' 
a voice , probably Kartashov 's , cried impulsively . 
`` We love you , we love you ! '' 
they all caught it up . 
There were tears in the eyes of many of them . 
`` Hurrah for Karamazov ! '' 
