What is the meaning of that great word ? 
What is the great idea in that name ? 
We have just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be . 
In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which our hearts are aching - in the present case , the father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , did not correspond to that conception of a father to which we have just referred . 
That 's the misfortune . 
And indeed some fathers are a misfortune . 
Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely : we must shrink from nothing , gentlemen of the jury , considering the importance of the decision you have to make . 
It 's our particular duty not to shrink from any idea , like children or frightened women , as the talented prosecutor happily expresses it . 
`` But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent -LRB- and he was my opponent before I opened my lips -RRB- exclaimed several times , ` Oh , I will not yield the defence of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down from Petersburg . 
I accuse , but I defend also ! ' 
He exclaimed that several times , but forgot to mention that if this terrible prisoner was for twenty-three years so grateful for a mere pound of nuts given him by the only man who had been kind to him , as a child in his father 's house , might not such a man well have remembered for twenty-three years how he ran in his father 's back-yard , without boots on his feet and with his little trousers hanging by one button ' - to use the expression of the kindhearted doctor , Herzenstube ? 
`` Oh , gentlemen of the jury , why need we look more closely at this misfortune , why repeat what we all know already ? 
What did my client meet with when he arrived here , at his father 's house , and why depict my client as a heartless egoist and monster ? 
He is uncontrolled , he is wild and unruly - we are trying him now for that - but who is responsible for his life ? 
Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up , in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitive heart ? 
Did anyone train him to be reasonable ? 
Was he enlightened by study ? 
Did anyone love him ever so little in his childhood ? 
My client was left to the care of Providence like a beast of the field . 
He thirsted perhaps to see his father after long years of separation . 
A thousand times perhaps he may , recalling his childhood , have driven away the loathsome phantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he may have longed to embrace and to forgive his father ! 
And what awaited him ? 
He was met by cynical taunts , suspicions and wrangling about money . 
He heard nothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over the brandy , and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him with his own money . 
Oh , gentlemen of the jury , that was cruel and revolting ! 
And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty of his son . 
He slandered him in society , injured him , calumniated him , bought up his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , people like my client , who are fierce , unruly , and uncontrolled on the surface , are sometimes , most frequently indeed , exceedingly tender-hearted , only they do n't express it . 
Do n't laugh , do n't laugh at my idea ! 
The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now at my client for loving Schiller - loving the sublime and beautiful ! 
I should not have laughed at that in his place . 
Yes , such natures - oh , let me speak in defence of such natures , so often and so cruelly misunderstood - these natures often thirst for tenderness , goodness , and justice , as it were , in contrast to themselves , their unruliness , their ferocity - they thirst for it unconsciously . 
Passionate and fierce on the surface , they are painfully capable of loving woman , for instance , and with a spiritual and elevated love . 
Again do not laugh at me , this is very often the case in such natures . 
But they can not hide their passions - sometimes very coarse - and that is conspicuous and is noticed , but the inner man is unseen . 
Their passions are quickly exhausted ; but , by the side of a noble and lofty creature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life , seeks to correct himself , to be better , to become noble and honourable , ` sublime and beautiful , ' however much the expression has been ridiculed . 
`` I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client 's engagement . 
But I may say half a word . 
What we heard just now was not evidence , but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman , and it was not for her - oh , not for her ! 
- to reproach him with treachery , for she has betrayed him ! 
If she had had but a little time for reflection she would not have given such evidence . 
Oh , do not believe her ! 
No , my client is not a monster , as she called him ! 
`` The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said : ' I am the Good Shepherd . 
The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep , so that not one of them might be lost . ' 
Let not a man 's soul be lost through us ! 
`` I asked just now what does ` father ' mean , and exclaimed that it was a great word , a precious name . 
But one must use words honestly , gentlemen , and I venture to call things by their right names : such a father as old Karamazov can not be called a father and does not deserve to be . 
Filial love for an unworthy father is an absurdity , an impossibility . 
Love can not be created from nothing : only God can create something from nothing . '' 
` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath , ' the apostle writes , from a heart glowing with love . 
It 's not for the sake of my client that I quote these sacred words , I mention them for all fathers . 
Who has authorised me to preach to fathers ? 
No one . 
But as a man and a citizen I make my appeal - vivos voco ! 
We are not long on earth , we do many evil deeds and say many evil words . 
So let us all catch a favourable moment when we are all together to say a good word to each other . 
That 's what I am doing : while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity . 
Not for nothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority - all Russia hears us ! 
I am not speaking only for the fathers here present , I cry aloud to all fathers : ` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath . ' 
Yes , let us first fulfil Christ 's injunction ourselves and only then venture to expect it of our children . 
Otherwise we are not fathers , but enemies of our children , and they are not our children , but our enemies , and we have made them our enemies ourselves . 
` What measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you again ' - it 's not I who say that , it 's the Gospel precept , measure to others according as they measure to you . 
How can we blame children if they measure us according to our measure ? 
`` Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretly given birth to a child . 
She was watched , and a box of which no one knew anything was found in the corner of the loft , behind some bricks . 
It was opened and inside was found the body of a new-born child which she had killed . 
In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babies which , according to her own confession , she had killed at the moment of their birth . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , was she a mother to her children ? 
She gave birth to them , indeed ; but was she a mother to them ? 
Would anyone venture to give her the sacred name of mother ? 
Let us be bold , gentlemen , let us be audacious even : it 's our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraid of certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky 's play , who are scared at the sound of certain words . 
No , let us prove that the progress of the last few years has touched even us , and let us say plainly , the father is not merely he who begets the child , but he who begets it and does his duty by it . 
`` Oh , of course , there is the other meaning , there is the other interpretation of the word ` father , ' which insists that any father , even though he be a monster , even though he be the enemy of his children , still remains my father simply because he begot me . 
But this is , so to say , the mystical meaning which I can not comprehend with my intellect , but can only accept by faith , or , better to say , on faith , like many other things which I do not understand , but which religion bids me believe . 
But in that case let it be kept outside the sphere of actual life . 
In the sphere of actual life , which has , indeed , its own rights , but also lays upon us great duties and obligations , in that sphere , if we want to be humane - Christian , in fact - we must , or ought to , act only upon convictions justified by reason and experience , which have been passed through the crucible of analysis ; in a word , we must act rationally , and not as though in dream and delirium , that we may not do harm , that we may not ill-treat and ruin a man . 
Then it will be real Christian work , not only mystic , but rational and philanthropic ... '' There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court , but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let him finish without interruption . 
The court relapsed into silence at once . 
The orator went on . 
`` Do you suppose , gentlemen , that our children as they grow up and begin to reason can avoid such questions ? 
No , they can not , and we will not impose on them an impossible restriction . 
The sight of an unworthy father involuntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature , especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of his companions . 
The conventional answer to this question is : ` He begot you , and you are his flesh and blood , and therefore you are bound to love him . ' 
The youth involuntarily reflects : ` But did he love me when he begot me ? ' 
he asks , wondering more and more . 
` Was it for my sake he begot me ? 
He did not know me , not even my sex , at that moment , at the moment of passion , perhaps , inflamed by wine , and he has only transmitted to me a propensity to drunkenness - that 's all he 's done for me ... . 
Why am I bound to love him simply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my life after ? ' 
`` Oh , perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel , but do not expect an impossible restraint from a young mind . 
` Drive nature out of the door and it will fly in at the window , ' and , above all , let us not be afraid of words , but decide the question according to the dictates of reason and humanity and not of mystic ideas . 
How shall it be decided ? 
Why , like this . 
Let the son stand before his father and ask him , ` Father , tell me , why must I love you ? 
Father , show me that I must love you , ' and if that father is able to answer him and show him good reason , we have a real , normal , parental relation , not resting on mystical prejudice , but on a rational , responsible and strictly humanitarian basis . 
But if he does not , there 's an end to the family tie . 
He is not a father to him , and the son has a right to look upon him as a stranger , and even an enemy . 
Our tribune , gentlemen of the jury , ought to be a school of true and sound ideas . '' 
-LRB- Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost frantic applause . 
Of course , it was not the whole audience , but a good half of it applauded . 
