`` No , no , '' he said . 
`` I 'll just make the sign of the cross over you , for now . 
Sit still . 
Now we 've a treat for you , in your own line , too . 
It 'll make you laugh . 
Balaam 's ass has begun talking to us here - and how he talks ! 
How he talks ! 
Balaam 's ass , it appeared , was the valet , Smerdyakov . 
He was a young man of about four and twenty , remarkably unsociable and taciturn . 
Not that he was shy or bashful . 
On the contrary , he was conceited and seemed to despise everybody . 
But we must pause to say a few words about him now . 
He was brought up by Grigory and Marfa , but the boy grew up `` with no sense of gratitude , '' as Grigory expressed it ; he was an unfriendly boy , and seemed to look at the world mistrustfully . 
In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats , and burying them with great ceremony . 
He used to dress up in a sheet as though it were a surplice , and sang , and waved some object over the dead cat as though it were a censer . 
All this he did on the sly , with the greatest secrecy . 
Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him a sound beating . 
He shrank into a corner and sulked there for a week . 
`` He does n't care for you or me , the monster , '' Grigory used to say to Marfa , `` and he does n't care for anyone . 
Are you a human being ? '' 
he said , addressing the boy directly . 
`` You 're not a human being . 
You grew from the mildew in the bath-house . 
That 's what you are , '' Smerdyakov , it appeared afterwards , could never forgive him those words . 
Grigory taught him to read and write , and when he was twelve years old , began teaching him the Scriptures . 
But this teaching came to nothing . 
At the second or third lesson the boy suddenly grinned . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
asked Grigory , looking at him threateningly from under his spectacles . 
`` Oh , nothing . 
God created light on the first day , and the sun , moon , and stars on the fourth day . 
Where did the light come from on the first day ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck . 
The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher . 
There was something positively condescending in his expression . 
Grigory could not restrain himself . 
`` I 'll show you where ! '' 
he cried , and gave the boy a violent slap on the cheek . 
The boy took the slap without a word , but withdrew into his corner again for some days . 
A week later he had his first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his life - epilepsy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it , his attitude to the boy seemed changed at once . 
Till then he had taken no notice of him , though he never scolded him , and always gave him a copeck when he met him . 
Sometimes , when he was in good humour , he would send the boy something sweet from his table . 
But as soon as he heard of his illness , he showed an active interest in him , sent for a doctor , and tried remedies , but the disease turned out to be incurable . 
The fits occurred , on an average , once a month , but at various intervals . 
The fits varied too , in violence : some were light and some were very severe . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy , and began allowing him to come upstairs to him . 
He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a time , too . 
One day when the boy was about fifteen , Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering by the bookcase , and reading the titles through the glass . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books - over a hundred - but no one ever saw him reading . 
He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase . 
`` Come , read . 
You shall be my librarian . 
You 'll be better sitting reading than hanging about the courtyard . 
Come , read this , '' and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave him Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka . 
He read a little but did n't like it . 
He did not once smile , and ended by frowning . 
`` Why ? 
Is n't it funny ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Smerdyakov did not speak . 
`` Answer stupid ! '' 
`` It 's all untrue , '' mumbled the boy , with a grin . 
`` Then go to the devil ! 
You have the soul of a lackey . 
Stay , here 's Smaragdov 's Universal History . 
That 's all true . 
Read that . '' 
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov . 
He thought it dull . 
So the bookcase was closed again . 
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary fastidiousness . 
He would sit before his soup , take up his spoon and look into the soup , bend over it , examine it , take a spoonful and hold it to the light . 
`` What is it ? 
A beetle ? '' 
Grigory would ask . 
`` A fly , perhaps , '' observed Marfa . 
The squeamish youth never answered , but he did the same with his bread , his meat , and everything he ate . 
He would hold a piece on his fork to the light , scrutinise it microscopically , and only after long deliberation decide to put it in his mouth . 
`` Ach ! 
What fine gentlemen 's airs ! '' 
Grigory muttered , looking at him . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined to make him his cook , and sent him to Moscow to be trained . 
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance . 
He looked extraordinarily old for his age . 
His face had grown wrinkled , yellow , and strangely emasculate . 
In character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away . 
He was just as unsociable , and showed not the slightest inclination for any companionship . 
In Moscow , too , as we heard afterwards , he had always been silent . 
Moscow itself had little interest for him ; he saw very little there , and took scarcely any notice of anything . 
He went once to the theatre , but returned silent and displeased with it . 
On the other hand , he came back to us from Moscow well dressed , in a clean coat and clean linen . 
He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably , and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special English polish , so that they shone like mirrors . 
He turned out a first rate cook . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary , almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes , pomade , perfumes , and such things . 
But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as for men ; he was discreet , almost unapproachable , with them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently . 
His fits were becoming more frequent , and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked , which did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all . 
`` Why are your fits getting worse ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , looking askance at his new cook . 
