`` Can I receive that pure liquid into an impure vessel and judge of its purity ? 
Only by the inner purification of myself can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive . '' 
`` Yes , yes , that is so , '' said Pierre joyfully . 
`` The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone , not on those worldly sciences of physics , history , chemistry , and the like , into which intellectual knowledge is divided . 
The highest wisdom is one . 
The highest wisdom has but one science -- the science of the whole - the science explaining the whole creation and man 's place in it . 
To receive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one 's inner self , and so before one can know , it is necessary to believe and to perfect one 's self . 
And to attain this end , we have the light called conscience that God has implanted in our souls . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
`` Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit , and ask thyself whether thou art content with thyself . 
What hast thou attained relying on reason only ? 
What art thou ? 
You are young , you are rich , you are clever , you are well educated . 
And what have you done with all these good gifts ? 
Are you content with yourself and with your life ? '' 
`` No , I hate my life , '' Pierre muttered , wincing . 
`` Thou hatest it . 
Then change it , purify thyself ; and as thou art purified , thou wilt gain wisdom . 
Look at your life , my dear sir . 
How have you spent it ? 
In riotous orgies and debauchery , receiving everything from society and giving nothing in return . 
You have become the possessor of wealth . 
How have you used it ? 
What have you done for your neighbor ? 
Have you ever thought of your tens of thousands of slaves ? 
Have you helped them physically and morally ? 
No ! 
You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life . 
That is what you have done . 
Have you chosen a post in which you might be of service to your neighbor ? 
No ! 
You have spent your life in idleness . 
Then you married , my dear sir -- took on yourself responsibility for the guidance of a young woman ; and what have you done ? 
You have not helped her to find the way of truth , my dear sir , but have thrust her into an abyss of deceit and misery . 
A man offended you and you shot him , and you say you do not know God and hate your life . 
There is nothing strange in that , my dear sir ! '' 
After these words , the Mason , as if tired by his long discourse , again leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes . 
Pierre looked at that aged , stern , motionless , almost lifeless face and moved his lips without uttering a sound . 
He wished to say , `` Yes , a vile , idle , vicious life ! '' 
but dared not break the silence . 
The Mason cleared his throat huskily , as old men do , and called his servant . 
`` How about the horses ? '' 
he asked , without looking at Pierre . 
`` The exchange horses have just come , '' answered the servant . 
`` Will you not rest here ? '' 
`` No , tell them to harness . '' 
`` Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told me all , and without promising to help me ? '' 
thought Pierre , rising with downcast head ; and he began to pace the room , glancing occasionally at the Mason . 
`` Yes , I never thought of it , but I have led a contemptible and profligate life , though I did not like it and did not want to , '' thought Pierre . 
`` But this man knows the truth and , if he wished to , could disclose it to me . '' 
Pierre wished to say this to the Mason , but did not dare to . 
The traveler , having packed his things with his practiced hands , began fastening his coat . 
When he had finished , he turned to Bezukhov , and said in a tone of indifferent politeness : `` Where are you going to now , my dear sir ? '' 
`` I ? 
... I 'm going to Petersburg , '' answered Pierre , in a childlike , hesitating voice . 
`` I thank you . 
I agree with all you have said . 
But do not suppose me to be so bad . 
With my whole soul I wish to be what you would have me be , but I have never had help from anyone ... . 
But it is I , above all , who am to blame for everything . 
Help me , teach me , and perhaps I may ... '' Pierre could not go on . 
He gulped and turned away . 
The Mason remained silent for a long time , evidently considering . 
`` Help comes from God alone , '' he said , `` but such measure of help as our Order can bestow it will render you , my dear sir . 
You are going to Petersburg . 
Hand this to Count Willarski '' -LRB- he took out his notebook and wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four -RRB- . 
`` Allow me to give you a piece of advice . 
When you reach the capital , first of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination and do not resume your former way of life . 
And now I wish you a good journey , my dear sir , '' he added , seeing that his servant had entered ... `` and success . '' 
The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev , as Pierre saw from the postmaster 's book . 
Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasons and Martinists , even in Novikov 's time . 
For a long while after he had gone , Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up and down the room , pondering over his vicious past , and with a rapturous sense of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful , irreproachable , virtuous future that seemed to him so easy . 
It seemed to him that he had been vicious only because he had somehow forgotten how good it is to be virtuous . 
Not a trace of his former doubts remained in his soul . 
He firmly believed in the possibility of the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supporting one another in the path of virtue , and that is how Freemasonry presented itself to him . 
On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of his arrival , he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas a Kempis , whose book had been sent him by someone unknown . 
One thing he continually realized as he read that book : the joy , hitherto unknown to him , of believing in the possibility of attaining perfection , and in the possibility of active brotherly love among men , which Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to him . 
A week after his arrival , the young Polish count , Willarski , whom Pierre had known slightly in Petersburg society , came into his room one evening in the official and ceremonious manner in which Dolokhov 's second had called on him , and , having closed the door behind him and satisfied himself that there was nobody else in the room , addressed Pierre . 
`` I have come to you with a message and an offer , Count , '' he said without sitting down . 
`` A person of very high standing in our Brotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Order before the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor . 
I consider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person 's wishes . 
Do you wish to enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship ? '' 
The cold , austere tone of this man , whom he had almost always before met at balls , amiably smiling in the society of the most brilliant women , surprised Pierre . 
`` Yes , I do wish it , '' said he . 
Willarski bowed his head . 
`` One more question , Count , '' he said , `` which beg you to answer in all sincerity -- not as a future Mason but as an honest man : have you renounced your former convictions -- do you believe in God ? '' 
Pierre considered . 
`` Yes ... yes , I believe in God , '' he said . 
`` In that case ... '' began Willarski , but Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Yes , I do believe in God , '' he repeated . 
`` In that case we can go , '' said Willarski . 
`` My carriage is at your service . '' 
Willarski was silent throughout the drive . 
To Pierre 's inquiries as to what he must do and how he should answer , Willarski only replied that brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre had only to tell the truth . 
Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge had its headquarters , and having ascended a dark staircase , they entered a small well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without the aid of a servant . 
From there they passed into another room . 
A man in strange attire appeared at the door . 
Willarski , stepping toward him , said something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to a small wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had never seen before . 
Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard , Willarski bound Pierre 's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind , catching some hairs painfully in the knot . 
Then he drew his face down , kissed him , and taking him by the hand led him forward . 
The hairs tied in the knot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and a shamefaced smile . 
His huge figure , with arms hanging down and with a puckered , though smiling face , moved after Willarski with uncertain , timid steps . 
Having led him about ten paces , Willarski stopped . 
`` Whatever happens to you , '' he said , `` you must bear it all manfully if you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood . '' 
-LRB- Pierre nodded affirmatively . -RRB- 
`` When you hear a knock at the door , you will uncover your eyes , '' added Willarski . 
`` I wish you courage and success , '' and , pressing Pierre 's hand , he went out . 
Left alone , Pierre went on smiling in the same way . 
Once or twice he shrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief , as if wishing to take it off , but let it drop again . 
The five minutes spent with his eyes bandaged seemed to him an hour . 
His arms felt numb , his legs almost gave way , it seemed to him that he was tired out . 
He experienced a variety of most complex sensations . 
He felt afraid of what would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear . 
He felt curious to know what was going to happen and what would be revealed to him ; but most of all , he felt joyful that the moment had come when he would at last start on that path of regeneration and on the actively virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since he met Joseph Alexeevich . 
Loud knocks were heard at the door . 
Pierre took the bandage off his eyes and glanced around him . 
The room was in black darkness , only a small lamp was burning inside something white . 
Pierre went nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on which lay an open book . 
The book was the Gospel , and the white thing with the lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and teeth . 
After reading the first words of the Gospel : `` In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God , '' Pierre went round the table and saw a large open box filled with something . 
It was a coffin with bones inside . 
He was not at all surprised by what he saw . 
Hoping to enter on an entirely new life quite unlike the old one , he expected everything to be unusual , even more unusual than what he was seeing . 
A skull , a coffin , the Gospel -- it seemed to him that he had expected all this and even more . 
Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around . 
`` God , death , love , the brotherhood of man , '' he kept saying to himself , associating these words with vague yet joyful ideas . 
The door opened and someone came in . 
By the dim light , to which Pierre had already become accustomed , he saw rather short man . 
Having evidently come from the light into the darkness , the man paused , then moved with cautious steps toward the table and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands . 
This short man had on a white leather apron which covered his chest and part of his legs ; he had on a kind of necklace above which rose a high white ruffle , outlining his rather long face which was lit up from below . 
`` For what have you come hither ? '' 
asked the newcomer , turning in Pierre 's direction at a slight rustle made by the latter . 
`` Why have you , who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have not seen the light , come here ? 
What do you seek from us ? 
Wisdom , virtue , enlightenment ? '' 
At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in , Pierre felt a sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in his boyhood at confession ; he felt himself in the presence of one socially a complete stranger , yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man . 
With bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor -LRB- by which name the brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into the Brotherhood was known -RRB- . 
Drawing nearer , he recognized in the Rhetor a man he knew , Smolyaninov , and it mortified him to think that the newcomer was an acquaintance -- he wished him simply a brother and a virtuous instructor . 
For a long time he could not utter a word , so that the Rhetor had to repeat his question . 
`` Yes ... I. . . 
I. . . 
desire regeneration , '' Pierre uttered with difficulty . 
`` Very well , '' said Smolyaninov , and went on at once : `` Have you any idea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reach your aim ? '' 
said he quietly and quickly . 
`` I. . . 
hope ... for guidance ... help ... in regeneration , '' said Pierre , with a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to his excitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters in Russian . 
`` What is your conception of Freemasonry ? '' 
`` I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of men who have virtuous aims , '' said Pierre , feeling ashamed of the inadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment , as he spoke . 
`` I imagine ... '' `` Good ! '' 
said the Rhetor quickly , apparently satisfied with this answer . 
`` Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion ? '' 
`` No , I considered it erroneous and did not follow it , '' said Pierre , so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked him what he was saying . 
`` I have been an atheist , '' answered Pierre . 
`` You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life , therefore you seek wisdom and virtue . 
Is that not so ? '' 
said the Rhetor , after a moment 's pause . 
`` Yes , yes , '' assented Pierre . 
The Rhetor cleared his throat , crossed his gloved hands on his breast , and began to speak . 
`` Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order , '' he said , `` and if this aim coincides with yours , you may enter our Brotherhood with profit . 
The first and chief object of our Order , the foundation on which it rests and which no human power can destroy , is the preservation and handing on to posterity of a certain important mystery ... which has come down to us from the remotest ages , even from the first man -- a mystery on which perhaps the fate of mankind depends . 
But since this mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or use it unless he be prepared by long and diligent self-purification , not everyone can hope to attain it quickly . 
Hence we have a secondary aim , that of preparing our members as much as possible to reform their hearts , to purify and enlighten their minds , by means handed on to us by tradition from those who have striven to attain this mystery , and thereby to render them capable of receiving it . 
`` By purifying and regenerating our members we try , thirdly , to improve the whole human race , offering it in our members an example of piety and virtue , and thereby try with all our might to combat the evil which sways the world . 
Think this over and I will come to you again . '' 
`` To combat the evil which sways the world ... '' Pierre repeated , and a mental image of his future activity in this direction rose in his mind . 
He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago , and he addressed an edifying exhortation to them . 
He imagined to himself vicious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word and deed , imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue . 
Of the three objects mentioned by the Rhetor , this last , that of improving mankind , especially appealed to Pierre . 
The important mystery mentioned by the Rhetor , though it aroused his curiosity , did not seem to him essential , and the second aim , that of purifying and regenerating himself , did not much interest him because at that moment he felt with delight that he was already perfectly cured of his former faults and was ready for all that was good . 
Half an hour later , the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker of the seven virtues , corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon 's temple , which every Freemason should cultivate in himself . 
These virtues were : 1 . 
Discretion , the keeping of the secrets of the Order . 
2 . 
Obedience to those of higher ranks in the Order . 
3 . 
Morality . 
4 . 
Love of mankind . 
5 . 
Courage . 
6 . 
Generosity . 
7 . 
The love of death . 
`` In the seventh place , try , by the frequent thought of death , '' the Rhetor said , `` to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe , but as a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue from this distressful life , and leads it to its place of recompense and peace . '' 
`` Yes , that must be so , '' thought Pierre , when after these words the Rhetor went away , leaving him to solitary meditation . 
`` It must be so , but I am still so weak that I love my life , the meaning of which is only now gradually opening before me . '' 
But five of the other virtues which Pierre recalled , counting them on his fingers , he felt already in his soul : courage , generosity , morality , love of mankind , and especially obedience -- which did not even seem to him a virtue , but a joy . 
-LRB- He now felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and to submit his will to those who knew the indubitable truth . -RRB- 
He forgot what the seventh virtue was and could not recall it . 
The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierre whether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit to all that would be required of him . 
`` I am ready for everything , '' said Pierre . 
`` I must also inform you , '' said the Rhetor , `` that our Order delivers its teaching not in words only but also by other means , which may perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker after wisdom and virtue than mere words . 
This chamber with what you see therein should already have suggested to your heart , if it is sincere , more than words could do . 
You will perhaps also see in your further initiation a like method of enlightenment . 
Our Order imitates the ancient societies that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics . 
A hieroglyph , '' said the Rhetor , `` is an emblem of something not cognizable by the senses but which possesses qualities resembling those of the symbol . '' 
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was , but dared not speak . 
He listened to the Rhetor in silence , feeling from all he said that his ordeal was about to begin . 
`` If you are resolved , I must begin your initiation , '' said the Rhetor coming closer to Pierre . 
`` In token of generosity I ask you to give me all your valuables . '' 
`` But I have nothing here , '' replied Pierre , supposing that he was asked to give up all he possessed . 
`` What you have with you : watch , money , rings ... '' Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch , but could not manage for some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger . 
When that had been done , the Rhetor said : `` In token of obedience , I ask you to undress . '' 
Pierre took off his coat , waistcoat , and left boot according to the Rhetor 's instructions . 
The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre 's left breast , and stooping down pulled up the left leg of his trousers to above the knee . 
Pierre hurriedly began taking off his right boot also and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to save this stranger the trouble , but the Mason told him that was not necessary and gave him a slipper for his left foot . 
With a childlike smile of embarrassment , doubt , and self-derision , which appeared on his face against his will , Pierre stood with his arms hanging down and legs apart , before his brother Rhetor , and awaited his further commands . 
`` And now , in token of candor , I ask you to reveal to me your chief passion , '' said the latter . 
`` My passion ! 
I have had so many , '' replied Pierre . 
`` That passion which more than all others caused you to waver on the path of virtue , '' said the Mason . 
Pierre paused , seeking a reply . 
`` Wine ? 
Gluttony ? 
Idleness ? 
Laziness ? 
Irritability ? 
Anger ? 
Women ? '' 
He went over his vices in his mind , not knowing to which of them to give the pre-eminence . 
`` Women , '' he said in a low , scarcely audible voice . 
The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after this answer . 
At last he moved up to Pierre and , taking the kerchief that lay on the table , again bound his eyes . 
`` For the last time I say to you -- turn all your attention upon yourself , put a bridle on your senses , and seek blessedness , not in passion but in your own heart . 
The source of blessedness is not without us but within ... '' Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshing source of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion . 
Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre , not the Rhetor but Pierre 's sponsor , Willarski , whom he recognized by his voice . 
To fresh questions as to the firmness of his resolution Pierre replied : `` Yes , yes , I agree , '' and with a beaming , childlike smile , his fat chest uncovered , stepping unevenly and timidly in one slippered and one booted foot , he advanced , while Willarski held a sword to his bare chest . 
He was conducted from that room along passages that turned backwards and forwards and was at last brought to the doors of the Lodge . 
Willarski coughed , he was answered by the Masonic knock with mallets , the doors opened before them . 
A bass voice -LRB- Pierre was still blindfold -RRB- questioned him as to who he was , when and where he was born , and so on . 
Then he was again led somewhere still blindfold , and as they went along he was told allegories of the toils of his pilgrimage , of holy friendship , of the Eternal Architect of the universe , and of the courage with which he should endure toils and dangers . 
During these wanderings , Pierre noticed that he was spoken of now as the `` Seeker , '' now as the `` Sufferer , '' and now as the `` Postulant , '' to the accompaniment of various knockings with mallets and swords . 
As he was being led up to some object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty among his conductors . 
He heard those around him disputing in whispers and one of them insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet . 
After that they took his right hand , placed it on something , and told him to hold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand and to repeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the laws of the Order . 
The candles were then extinguished and some spirit lighted , as Pierre knew by the smell , and he was told that he would now see the lesser light . 
The bandage was taken off his eyes and , by the faint light of the burning spirit , Pierre , as in a dream , saw several men standing before him , wearing aprons like the Rhetor 's and holding swords in their hands pointed at his breast . 
Among them stood a man whose white shirt was stained with blood . 
On seeing this , Pierre moved forward with his breast toward the swords , meaning them to pierce it . 
But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at once blindfolded again . 
`` Now thou hast seen the lesser light , '' uttered a voice . 
Then the candles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light ; the bandage was again removed and more than ten voices said together : `` Sic transit gloria mundi . '' 
Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at the room and at the people in it . 
Round a long table covered with black sat some twelve men in garments like those he had already seen . 
Some of them Pierre had met in Petersburg society . 
In the President 's chair sat a young man he did not know , with a peculiar cross hanging from his neck . 
On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met at Anna Pavlovna 's two years before . 
There were also present a very distinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at the Kuragins ' . 
All maintained a solemn silence , listening to the words of the President , who held a mallet in his hand . 
Let into the wall was a star-shaped light . 
At one side of the table was a small carpet with various figures worked upon it , at the other was something resembling an altar on which lay a Testament and a skull . 
Round it stood seven large candlesticks like those used in churches . 
Two of the brothers led Pierre up to the altar , placed his feet at right angles , and bade him lie down , saying that he must prostrate himself at the Gates of the Temple . 
`` He must first receive the trowel , '' whispered one of the brothers . 
`` Oh , hush , please ! '' 
said another . 
Pierre , perplexed , looked round with his shortsighted eyes without obeying , and suddenly doubts arose in his mind . 
`` Where am I ? 
What am I doing ? 
Are n't they laughing at me ? 
Sha n't I be ashamed to remember this ? '' 
But these doubts only lasted a moment . 
Pierre glanced at the serious faces of those around , remembered all he had already gone through , and realized that he could not stop halfway . 
He was aghast at his hesitation and , trying to arouse his former devotional feeling , prostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple . 
And really , the feeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before . 
When he had lain there some time , he was told to get up , and a white leather apron , such as the others wore , was put on him : he was given a trowel and three pairs of gloves , and then the Grand Master addressed him . 
He told him that he should try to do nothing to stain the whiteness of that apron , which symbolized strength and purity ; then of the unexplained trowel , he told him to toil with it to cleanse his own heart from vice , and indulgently to smooth with it the heart of his neighbor . 
As to the first pair of gloves , a man 's , he said that Pierre could not know their meaning but must keep them . 
The second pair of man 's gloves he was to wear at the meetings , and finally of the third , a pair of women 's gloves , he said : `` Dear brother , these woman 's gloves are intended for you too . 
Give them to the woman whom you shall honor most of all . 
This gift will be a pledge of your purity of heart to her whom you select to be your worthy helpmeet in Masonry . '' 
And after a pause , he added : `` But beware , dear brother , that these gloves do not deck hands that are unclean . '' 
While the Grand Master said these last words it seemed to Pierre that he grew embarrassed . 
Pierre himself grew still more confused , blushed like a child till tears came to his eyes , began looking about him uneasily , and an awkward pause followed . 
This silence was broken by one of the brethren , who led Pierre up to the rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanation of all the figures on it : the sun , the moon , a hammer , a plumb line , a trowel , a rough stone and a squared stone , a pillar , three windows , and so on . 
Then a place was assigned to Pierre , he was shown the signs of the Lodge , told the password , and at last was permitted to sit down . 
The Grand Master began reading the statutes . 
They were very long , and Pierre , from joy , agitation , and embarrassment , was not in a state to understand what was being read . 
He managed to follow only the last words of the statutes and these remained in his mind . 
`` In our temples we recognize no other distinctions , '' read the Grand Master , `` but those between virtue and vice . 
Beware of making any distinctions which may infringe equality . 
Fly to a brother 's aid whoever he may be , exhort him who goeth astray , raise him that falleth , never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother . 
Be kindly and courteous . 
Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue . 
Share thy happiness with thy neighbor , and may envy never dim the purity of that bliss . 
Forgive thy enemy , do not avenge thyself except by doing him good . 
Thus fulfilling the highest law thou shalt regain traces of the ancient dignity which thou hast lost . '' 
He finished and , getting up , embraced and kissed Pierre , who , with tears of joy in his eyes , looked round him , not knowing how to answer the congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that met him on all sides . 
He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in all these men only brothers , and burned with impatience to set to work with them . 
The Grand Master rapped with his mallet . 
All the Masons sat down in their places , and one of them read an exhortation on the necessity of humility . 
The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed , and the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of `` Collector of Alms '' went round to all the brothers . 
Pierre would have liked to subscribe all he had , but fearing that it might look like pride subscribed the same amount as the others . 
The meeting was at an end , and on reaching home Pierre felt as if he had returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens of years , had become completely changed , and had quite left behind his former habits and way of life . 
The day after he had been received into the Lodge , Pierre was sitting at home reading a book and trying to fathom the significance of the Square , one side of which symbolized God , another moral things , a third physical things , and the fourth a combination of these . 
Now and then his attention wandered from the book and the Square and he formed in imagination a new plan of life . 
On the previous evening at the Lodge , he had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached the Emperor and that it would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg . 
Pierre proposed going to his estates in the south and there attending to the welfare of his serfs . 
He was joyfully planning this new life , when Prince Vasili suddenly entered the room . 
`` My dear fellow , what have you been up to in Moscow ? 
Why have you quarreled with Helene , mon cher ? 
You are under a delusion , '' said Prince Vasili , as he entered . 
`` I know all about it , and I can tell you positively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ was before the Jews . '' 
Pierre was about to reply , but Prince Vasili interrupted him . 
`` And why did n't you simply come straight to me as to a friend ? 
I know all about it and understand it all , '' he said . 
`` You behaved as becomes a man values his honor , perhaps too hastily , but we wo n't go into that . 
But consider the position in which you are placing her and me in the eyes of society , and even of the court , '' he added , lowering his voice . 
`` She is living in Moscow and you are here . 
Remember , dear boy , '' and he drew Pierre 's arm downwards , `` it is simply a misunderstanding . 
I expect you feel it so yourself . 
Let us write her a letter at once , and she 'll come here and all will be explained , or else , my dear boy , let me tell you it 's quite likely you 'll have to suffer for it . '' 
Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look . 
`` I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking a keen interest in the whole affair . 
You know she is very gracious to Helene . '' 
Pierre tried several times to speak , but , on one hand , Prince Vasili did not let him and , on the other , Pierre himself feared to begin to speak in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which he had firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law . 
Moreover , the words of the Masonic statutes , `` be kindly and courteous , '' recurred to him . 
He blinked , went red , got up and sat down again , struggling with himself to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life -- to say an unpleasant thing to a man 's face , to say what the other , whoever he might be , did not expect . 
He was so used to submitting to Prince Vasili 's tone of careless self-assurance that he felt he would be unable to withstand it now , but he also felt that on what he said now his future depended -- whether he would follow the same old road , or that new path so attractively shown him by the Masons , on which he firmly believed he would be reborn to a new life . 
`` Now , dear boy , '' said Prince Vasili playfully , `` say ` yes , ' and I 'll write to her myself , and we will kill the fatted calf . '' 
But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech , Pierre , without looking at him , and with a kind of fury that made him like his father , muttered in a whisper : `` Prince , I did not ask you here . 
Go , please go ! '' 
And he jumped up and opened the door for him . 
`` Go ! '' 
he repeated , amazed at himself and glad to see the look of confusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili 's face . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
Are you ill ? '' 
`` Go ! '' 
the quivering voice repeated . 
And Prince Vasili had to go without receiving any explanation . 
A week later , Pierre , having taken leave of his new friends , the Masons , and leaving large sums of money with them for alms , went away to his estates . 
His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev and Odessa Masons and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity . 
The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and , in spite of the Emperor 's severity regarding duels at that time , neither the principals nor their seconds suffered for it . 
But the story of the duel , confirmed by Pierre 's rupture with his wife , was the talk of society . 
Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescension when he was an illegitimate son , and petted and extolled when he was the best match in Russia , had sunk greatly in the esteem of society after his marriage -- when the marriageable daughters and their mothers had nothing to hope from him -- especially as he did not know how , and did not wish , to court society 's favor . 
Now he alone was blamed for what had happened , he was said to be insanely jealous and subject like his father to fits of bloodthirsty rage . 
And when after Pierre 's departure Helene returned to Petersburg , she was received by all her acquaintances not only cordially , but even with a shade of deference due to her misfortune . 
When conversation turned on her husband Helene assumed a dignified expression , which with characteristic tact she had acquired though she did not understand its significance . 
This expression suggested that she had resolved to endure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband was a cross laid upon her by God . 
Prince Vasili expressed his opinion more openly . 
He shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and , pointing to his forehead , remarked : `` A bit touched -- I always said so . '' 
`` I said from the first , '' declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre , `` I said at the time and before anyone else '' -LRB- she insisted on her priority -RRB- `` that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraved ideas of these days . 
I said so even at the time when everybody was in raptures about him , when he had just returned from abroad , and when , if you remember , he posed as a sort of Marat at one of my soirees . 
And how has it ended ? 
I was against this marriage even then and foretold all that has happened . '' 
Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind of soirees as before -- such as she alone had the gift of arranging -- at which was to be found `` the cream of really good society , the bloom of the intellectual essence of Petersburg , '' as she herself put it . 
Besides this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna 's receptions were also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some new and interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was the state of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg court society so dearly and distinctly indicated . 
Toward the end of 1806 , when all the sad details of Napoleon 's destruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and the surrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received , when our troops had already entered Prussia and our second war with Napoleon was beginning , Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees . 
The `` cream of really good society '' consisted of the fascinating Helene , forsaken by her husband , Mortemart , the delightful Prince Hippolyte who had just returned from Vienna , two diplomatists , the old aunt , a young man referred to in that drawing room as `` a man of great merit '' -LRB- un homme de beaucoup de merite -RRB- , a newly appointed maid of honor and her mother , and several other less noteworthy persons . 
The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that evening was Boris Drubetskoy , who had just arrived as a special messenger from the Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage . 
The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the company that evening was this : `` Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do to countenance Bonaparte , and to cause me , and us in general , annoyance and mortification , our opinion of Bonaparte can not alter . 
We shall not cease to express our sincere views on that subject , and can only say to the King Prussia and others : ` So much the worse for you . 
Tu l'as voulu , George Dandin , ' that 's all we have to say about it ! '' 
When Boris , who was to be served up to the guests , entered the drawing room , almost all the company had assembled , and the conversation , guided by Anna Pavlovna , was about our diplomatic relations with Austria and the hope of an alliance with her . 
Boris , grown more manly and looking fresh , rosy and self-possessed , entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in the uniform of an aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay his respects to the aunt and then brought back to the general circle . 
Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced him to several persons whom he did not know , giving him a whispered description of each . 
`` Prince Hippolyte Kuragin , M. Krug , the charge d'affaires from Copenhagen -- a profound intellect , '' and simply , `` Mr. Shitov -- a man of great merit '' -- this of the man usually so described . 
Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna 's efforts , his own tastes , and the peculiarities of his reserved nature , Boris had managed during his service to place himself very advantageously . 
He was aide-de-camp to a very important personage , had been sent on a very important mission to Prussia , and had just returned from there as a special messenger . 
He had become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with which he had been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensign might rank incomparably higher than a general , and according to which what was needed for success in the service was not effort or work , or courage , or perseverance , but only the knowledge of how to get on with those who can grant rewards , and he was himself often surprised at the rapidity of his success and at the inability of others to understand these things . 
In consequence of this discovery his whole manner of life , all his relations with old friends , all his plans for his future , were completely altered . 
He was not rich , but would spend his last groat to be better dressed than others , and would rather deprive himself of many pleasures than allow himself to be seen in a shabby equipage or appear in the streets of Petersburg in an old uniform . 
He made friends with and sought the acquaintance of only those above him in position and who could therefore be of use to him . 
He liked Petersburg and despised Moscow . 
The remembrance of the Rostovs ' house and of his childish love for Natasha was unpleasant to him and he had not once been to see the Rostovs since the day of his departure for the army . 
To be in Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room he considered an important step up in the service , and he at once understood his role , letting his hostess make use of whatever interest he had to offer . 
He himself carefully scanned each face , appraising the possibilities of establishing intimacy with each of those present , and the advantages that might accrue . 
He took the seat indicated to him beside the fair Helene and listened to the general conversation . 
`` Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainable that not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would secure them , and she doubts the means we have of gaining them . 
That is the actual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet , '' said the Danish charge d'affaires . 
`` The doubt is flattering , '' said `` the man of profound intellect , '' with a subtle smile . 
`` We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor of Austria , '' said Mortemart . 
`` The Emperor of Austria can never have thought of such a thing , it is only the cabinet that says it . '' 
`` Ah , my dear vicomte , '' put in Anna Pavlovna , `` L'Urope '' -LRB- for some reason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refined French pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversing with a Frenchman -RRB- , `` L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere . '' 
* * `` Europe will never be our sincere ally . '' 
After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of the King of Prussia , in order to draw Boris into the conversation . 
Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers , awaiting his turn , but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at his neighbor , the beautiful Helene , whose eyes several times met those of the handsome young aide-de-camp with a smile . 
Speaking of the position of Prussia , Anna Pavlovna very naturally asked Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what state he found the Prussian army . 
Boris , speaking with deliberation , told them in pure , correct French many interesting details about the armies and the court , carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion of his own about the facts he was recounting . 
For some time he engrossed the general attention , and Anna Pavlovna felt that the novelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all her visitors . 
The greatest attention of all to Boris ' narrative was shown by Helene . 
She asked him several questions about his journey and seemed greatly interested in the state of the Prussian army . 
As soon as he had finished she turned to him with her usual smile . 
`` You absolutely must come and see me , '' she said in a tone that implied that , for certain considerations he could not know of , this was absolutely necessary . 
`` On Tuesday between eight and nine . 
It will give me great pleasure . '' 
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin a conversation with her , when Anna Pavlovna called him away on the pretext that her aunt wished to hear him . 
`` You know her husband , of course ? '' 
said Anna Pavlovna , closing her eyes and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture . 
`` Ah , she is such an unfortunate and charming woman ! 
Do n't mention him before her -- please do n't ! 
It is too painful for her ! '' 
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolyte had the ear of the company . 
Bending forward in his armchair he said : `` Le Roi de Prusse ! '' 
and having said this laughed . 
Everyone turned toward him . 
`` Le Roi de Prusse ? '' 
Hippolyte said interrogatively , again laughing , and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair . 
Anna Pavlovna waited for him to go on , but as he seemed quite decided to say no more she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impious Bonaparte had stolen the sword of Frederick the Great . 
`` It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I. . . '' 
she began , but Hippolyte interrupted her with the words : `` Le Roi de Prusse ... '' and again , as soon as all turned toward him , excused himself and said no more . 
Anna Pavlovna frowned . 
Mortemart , Hippolyte 's friend , addressed him firmly . 
`` Come now , what about your Roi de Prusse ? '' 
Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing . 
`` Oh , it 's nothing . 
I only wished to say ... '' -LRB- he wanted to repeat a joke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all that evening to get in -RRB- `` I only wished to say that we are wrong to fight pour le Roi de Prusse ! '' 
Boris smiled circumspectly , so that it might be taken as ironical or appreciative according to the way the joke was received . 
Everybody laughed . 
`` Your joke is too bad , it 's witty but unjust , '' said Anna Pavlovna , shaking her little shriveled finger at him . 
`` We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse , but for right principles . 
Oh , that wicked Prince Hippolyte ! '' 
she said . 
The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly on the political news . 
It became particularly animated toward the end of the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor were mentioned . 
`` You know N -- N -- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year ? '' 
said `` the man of profound intellect . '' 
`` Why should n't S -- S -- get the same distinction ? '' 
`` Pardon me ! 
A snuffbox with the Emperor 's portrait is a reward but not a distinction , '' said the diplomatist -- `` a gift , rather . '' 
`` There are precedents , I may mention Schwarzenberg . '' 
`` It 's impossible , '' replied another . 
`` Will you bet ? 
The ribbon of the order is a different matter ... '' When everybody rose to go , Helene who had spoken very little all the evening again turned to Boris , asking him in a tone of caressing significant command to come to her on Tuesday . 
`` It is of great importance to me , '' she said , turning with a smile toward Anna Pavlovna , and Anna Pavlovna , with the same sad smile with which she spoke of her exalted patroness , supported Helene 's wish . 
It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that evening about the Prussian army , Helene had suddenly found it necessary to see him . 
She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when he came on Tuesday . 
But on Tuesday evening , having come to Helene 's splendid salon , Boris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to come . 
There were other guests and the countess talked little to him , and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave said unexpectedly and in a whisper , with a strangely unsmiling face : `` Come to dinner tomorrow ... in the evening . 
You must come ... . 
Come ! '' 
During that stay in Petersburg , Boris became an intimate in the countess ' house . 
The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier . 
Everywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte , `` the enemy of mankind . '' 
Militiamen and recruits were being enrolled in the villages , and from the seat of war came contradictory news , false as usual and therefore variously interpreted . 
The life of old Prince Bolkonski , Prince Andrew , and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805 . 
In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chief then appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughout Russia . 
Despite the weakness of age , which had become particularly noticeable since the time when he thought his son had been killed , he did not think it right to refuse a duty to which he had been appointed by the Emperor himself , and this fresh opportunity for action gave him new energy and strength . 
He was continually traveling through the three provinces entrusted to him , was pedantic in the fulfillment of his duties , severe to cruelty with his subordinates , and went into everything down to the minutest details himself . 
Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her father , and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- . 
The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess ' rooms and Princess Mary spent most of the day in the nursery , taking a mother 's place to her little nephew as best she could . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , too , seemed passionately fond of the boy , and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel -- as she called her nephew -- and playing with him . 
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the tomb of the little princess , and in this chapel was a marble monument brought from Italy , representing an angel with outspread wings ready to fly upwards . 
The angel 's upper lip was slightly raised as though about to smile , and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel 's face reminded them strangely of the little princess . 
But what was still stranger , though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister , was that in the expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel 's face , Prince Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead wife : `` Ah , why have you done this to me ? '' 
Soon after Prince Andrew 's return the old prince made over to him a large estate , Bogucharovo , about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills . 
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills , partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with his father 's peculiarities , and partly because he needed solitude , Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo , began building and spent most of his time there . 
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to continue his military service , and when the war recommenced and everybody had to serve , he took a post under his father in the recruitment so as to avoid active service . 
The old prince and his son seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805 . 
The old man , roused by activity , expected the best results from the new campaign , while Prince Andrew on the contrary , taking no part in the war and secretly regretting this , saw only the dark side . 
On February 26 , 1807 , the old prince set off on one of his circuits . 
Prince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father 's absence . 
Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days . 
The coachman who had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrew . 
Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with the letters to Princess Mary 's apartments , but did not find him there . 
He was told that the prince had gone to the nursery . 
`` If you please , your excellency , Petrusha has brought some papers , '' said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sitting on a child 's little chair while , frowning and with trembling hands , he poured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full of water . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he said crossly , and , his hand shaking unintentionally , he poured too many drops into the glass . 
He threw the mixture onto the floor and asked for some more water . 
The maid brought it . 
There were in the room a child 's cot , two boxes , two armchairs , a table , a child 's table , and the little chair on which Prince Andrew was sitting . 
The curtains were drawn , and a single candle was burning on the table , screened by a bound music book so that the light did not fall on the cot . 
`` My dear , '' said Princess Mary , addressing her brother from beside the cot where she was standing , `` better wait a bit ... later ... '' `` Oh , leave off , you always talk nonsense and keep putting things off -- and this is what comes of it ! '' 
said Prince Andrew in an exasperated whisper , evidently meaning to wound his sister . 
`` My dear , really ... it 's better not to wake him ... he 's asleep , '' said the princess in a tone of entreaty . 
Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed , wineglass in hand . 
`` Perhaps we 'd really better not wake him , '' he said hesitating . 
`` As you please ... really ... I think so ... but as you please , '' said Princess Mary , evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion had prevailed . 
She drew her brother 's attention to the maid who was calling him in a whisper . 
It was the second night that neither of them had slept , watching the boy who was in a high fever . 
These last days , mistrusting their household doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town , they had been trying first one remedy and then another . 
Worn out by sleeplessness and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on one another and reproached and disputed with each other . 
`` Petrusha has come with papers from your father , '' whispered the maid . 
Prince Andrew went out . 
`` Devil take them ! '' 
he muttered , and after listening to the verbal instructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and his father 's letter , he returned to the nursery . 
`` Well ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Still the same . 
Wait , for heaven 's sake . 
Karl Ivanich always says that sleep is more important than anything , '' whispered Princess Mary with a sigh . 
Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him . 
He was burning hot . 
`` Confound you and your Karl Ivanich ! '' 
He took the glass with the drops and again went up to the cot . 
`` Andrew , do n't ! '' 
said Princess Mary . 
But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in his eyes , and stooped glass in hand over the infant . 
`` But I wish it , '' he said . 
`` I beg you -- give it him ! '' 
Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissively and calling the nurse began giving the medicine . 
The child screamed hoarsely . 
Prince Andrew winced and , clutching his head , went out and sat down on a sofa in the next room . 
He still had all the letters in his hand . 
Opening them mechanically he began reading . 
The old prince , now and then using abbreviations , wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper as follows : Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyful news -- if it 's not false . 
Bennigsen seems to have obtained a complete victory over Buonaparte at Eylau . 
In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing , and the rewards sent to the army are innumerable . 
Though he is a German -- I congratulate him ! 
I ca n't make out what the commander at Korchevo -- a certain Khandrikov -- is up to ; till now the additional men and provisions have not arrived . 
Gallop off to him at once and say I 'll have his head off if everything is not here in a week . 
Have received another letter about the Preussisch-Eylau battle from Petenka -- he took part in it -- and it 's all true . 
When mischief-makers do n't meddle even a German beats Buonaparte . 
He is said to be fleeing in great disorder . 
Mind you gallop off to Korchevo without delay and carry out instructions ! 
Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope . 
It was a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin . 
He folded it up without reading it and reread his father 's letter , ending with the words : `` Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions ! '' 
`` No , pardon me , I wo n't go now till the child is better , '' thought he , going to the door and looking into the nursery . 
Princess Mary was still standing by the cot , gently rocking the baby . 
`` Ah yes , and what else did he say that 's unpleasant ? '' 
thought Prince Andrew , recalling his father 's letter . 
`` Yes , we have gained a victory over Bonaparte , just when I 'm not serving . 
Yes , yes , he 's always poking fun at me ... . 
Ah , well ! 
Let him ! '' 
And he began reading Bilibin 's letter which was written in French . 
He read without understanding half of it , read only to forget , if but for a moment , what he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion of all else . 
Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity , and though he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms , he described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure and self-derision genuinely Russian . 
Bilibin wrote that the obligation of diplomatic discretion tormented him , and he was happy to have in Prince Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out the bile he had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in the army . 
The letter was old , having been written before the battle at Preussisch-Eylau . 
`` Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz , '' wrote Bilibin , `` as you know , my dear prince , I never leave headquarters . 
I have certainly acquired a taste for war , and it is just as well for me ; what I have seen during these last three months is incredible . 
`` I begin ab ovo . 
` The enemy of the human race , ' as you know , attacks the Prussians . 
The Prussians are our faithful allies who have only betrayed us three times in three years . 
We take up their cause , but it turns out that ` the enemy of the human race ' pays no heed to our fine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on the Prussians without giving them time to finish the parade they had begun , and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens and installs himself in the palace at Potsdam . '' ' 
I most ardently desire , ' writes the King of Prussia to Bonaparte , ` that Your Majesty should be received and treated in my palace in a manner agreeable to yourself , and in so far as circumstances allowed , I have hastened to take all steps to that end . 
May I have succeeded ! ' 
The Prussian generals pride themselves on being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the first demand . 
`` The head of the garrison at Glogau , with ten thousand men , asks the King of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender ... . 
All this is absolutely true . 
`` In short , hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude , it turns out that we have landed ourselves in war , and what is more , in war on our own frontiers , with and for the King of Prussia . 
We have everything in perfect order , only one little thing is lacking , namely , a commander in chief . 
As it was considered that the Austerlitz success might have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been so young , all our octogenarians were reviewed , and of Prozorovski and Kamenski the latter was preferred . 
The general comes to us , Suvorov-like , in a kibitka , and is received with acclamations of joy and triumph . 
`` On the 4th , the first courier arrives from Petersburg . 
The mails are taken to the field marshal 's room , for he likes to do everything himself . 
I am called in to help sort the letters and take those meant for us . 
The field marshal looks on and waits for letters addressed to him . 
We search , but none are to be found . 
The field marshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds letters from the Emperor to Count T. , Prince V. , and others . 
Then he bursts into one of his wild furies and rages at everyone and everything , seizes the letters , opens them , and reads those from the Emperor addressed to others . 
` Ah ! 
So that 's the way they treat me ! 
No confidence in me ! 
Ah , ordered to keep an eye on me ! 
Very well then ! 
Get along with you ! ' 
So he writes the famous order of the day to General Bennigsen : ' I am wounded and can not ride and consequently can not command the army . 
You have brought your army corps to Pultusk , routed : here it is exposed , and without fuel or forage , so something must be done , and , as you yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday , you must think of retreating to our frontier -- which do today . ' '' 
` From all my riding , ' he writes to the Emperor , ' I have got a saddle sore which , coming after all my previous journeys , quite prevents my riding and commanding so vast an army , so I have passed on the command to the general next in seniority , Count Buxhowden , having sent him my whole staff and all that belongs to it , advising him if there is a lack of bread , to move farther into the interior of Prussia , for only one day 's ration of bread remains , and in some regiments none at all , as reported by the division commanders , Ostermann and Sedmoretzki , and all that the peasants had has been eaten up . 
I myself will remain in hospital at Ostrolenka till I recover . 
In regard to which I humbly submit my report , with the information that if the army remains in its present bivouac another fortnight there will not be a healthy man left in it by spring . '' 
` Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who is already in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the great and glorious task for which he was chosen . 
I shall await your most gracious permission here in hospital , that I may not have to play the part of a secretary rather than commander in the army . 
My removal from the army does not produce the slightest stir -- a blind man has left it . 
There are thousands such as I in Russia . ' 
`` The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all , is n't it logical ? 
`` This is the first act . 
Those that follow are naturally increasingly interesting and entertaining . 
After the field marshal 's departure it appears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle . 
Buxhowden is commander in chief by seniority , but General Bennigsen does not quite see it ; more particularly as it is he and his corps who are within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by the opportunity to fight a battle ` on his own hand ' as the Germans say . 
He does so . 
This is the battle of Pultusk , which is considered a great victory but in my opinion was nothing of the kind . 
We civilians , as you know , have a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was won or lost . 
Those who retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say ; and according to that it is we who lost the battle of Pultusk . 
In short , we retreat after the battle but send a courier to Petersburg with news of a victory , and General Bennigsen , hoping to receive from Petersburg the post of commander in chief as a reward for his victory , does not give up the command of the army to General Buxhowden . 
During this interregnum we begin a very original and interesting series of maneuvers . 
Our aim is no longer , as it should be , to avoid or attack the enemy , but solely to avoid General Buxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief . 
So energetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing an unfordable river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from our enemy , who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden . 
General Buxhowden was all but attacked and captured by a superior enemy force as a result of one of these maneuvers that enabled us to escape him . 
Buxhowden pursues us -- we scuttle . 
He hardly crosses the river to our side before we recross to the other . 
At last our enemy . 
Buxhowden , catches us and attacks . 
Both generals are angry , and the result is a challenge on Buxhowden 's part and an epileptic fit on Bennigsen 's . 
But at the critical moment the courier who carried the news of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburg returns bringing our appointment as commander in chief , and our first foe , Buxhowden , is vanquished ; we can now turn our thoughts to the second , Bonaparte . 
But as it turns out , just at that moment a third enemy rises before us - namely the Orthodox Russian soldiers , loudly demanding bread , meat , biscuits , fodder , and whatnot ! 
The stores are empty , the roads impassable . 
The Orthodox begin looting , and in a way of which our last campaign can give you no idea . 
Half the regiments form bands and scour the countryside and put everything to fire and sword . 
The inhabitants are totally ruined , the hospitals overflow with sick , and famine is everywhere . 
Twice the marauders even attack our headquarters , and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion to disperse them . 
During one of these attacks they carried off my empty portmanteau and my dressing gown . 
The Emperor proposes to give all commanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders , but I much fear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other . '' 
At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only , but after a while , in spite of himself -LRB- although he knew how far it was safe to trust Bilibin -RRB- , what he had read began to interest him more and more . 
When he had read thus far , he crumpled the letter up and threw it away . 
It was not what he had read that vexed him , but the fact that the life out there in which he had now no part could perturb him . 
He shut his eyes , rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in what he had read , and listened to what was passing in the nursery . 
Suddenly he thought he heard a strange noise through the door . 
He was seized with alarm lest something should have happened to the child while he was reading the letter . 
He went on tiptoe to the nursery door and opened it . 
Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something from him with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by the cot . 
`` My dear , '' he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behind him . 
As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety , he was seized by an unreasoning panic -- it occurred to him that the child was dead . 
All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror . 
`` All is over , '' he thought , and a cold sweat broke out on his forehead . 
He went to the cot in confusion , sure that he would find it empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby . 
He drew the curtain aside and for some time his frightened , restless eyes could not find the baby . 
At last he saw him : the rosy boy had tossed about till he lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow , and was smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly . 
Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that , as if he had already lost him . 
He bent over him and , as his sister had taught him , tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish . 
The soft forehead was moist . 
Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand ; even the hair was wet , so profusely had the child perspired . 
He was not dead , but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent . 
Prince Andrew longed to snatch up , to squeeze , to hold to his heart , this helpless little creature , but dared not do so . 
He stood over him , gazing at his head and at the little arms and legs which showed under the blanket . 
He heard a rustle behind him and a shadow appeared under the curtain of the cot . 
He did not look round , but still gazing at the infant 's face listened to his regular breathing . 
The dark shadow was Princess Mary , who had come up to the cot with noiseless steps , lifted the curtain , and dropped it again behind her . 
Prince Andrew recognized her without looking and held out his hand to her . 
She pressed it . 
`` He has perspired , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` I was coming to tell you so . '' 
The child moved slightly in his sleep , smiled , and rubbed his forehead against the pillow . 
Prince Andrew looked at his sister . 
In the dim shadow of the curtain her luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joy that were in them . 
She leaned over to her brother and kissed him , slightly catching the curtain of the cot . 
Each made the other a warning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtain as if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shut off from all the world . 
Prince Andrew was the first to move away , ruffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain . 
`` Yes , this is the one thing left me now , '' he said with a sigh . 
Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood , Pierre went to the Kiev province , where he had the greatest number of serfs , taking with him full directions which he had written down for his own guidance as to what he should do on his estates . 
When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head office and explained to them his intentions and wishes . 
He told them that steps would be taken immediately to free his serfs -- and that till then they were not to be overburdened with labor , women while nursing their babies were not to be sent to work , assistance was to be given to the serfs , punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal , and hospitals , asylums , and schools were to be established on all the estates . 
Some of the stewards -LRB- there were semiliterate foremen among them -RRB- listened with alarm , supposing these words to mean that the young count was displeased with their management and embezzlement of money , some after their first fright were amused by Pierre 's lisp and the new words they had not heard before , others simply enjoyed hearing how the master talked , while the cleverest among them , including the chief steward , understood from this speech how they could best handle the master for their own ends . 
The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre 's intentions , but remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to go into the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory . 
Despite Count Bezukhov 's enormous wealth , since he had come into an income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles a year , Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made him an allowance of ten thousand rubles . 
He had a dim perception of the following budget : About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank , about 30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow , the town house , and the allowance to the three princesses ; about 15,000 was given in pensions and the same amount for asylums ; 150,000 alimony was sent to the countess ; about 70,00 went for interest on debts . 
The building of a new church , previously begun , had cost about 10,000 in each of the last two years , and he did not know how the rest , about 100,000 rubles , was spent , and almost every year he was obliged to borrow . 
Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him of fires and bad harvests , or of the necessity of rebuilding factories and workshops . 
So the first task Pierre had to face was one for which he had very little aptitude or inclination -- practical business . 
He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward . 
But he felt that this did not forward matters at all . 
He felt that these consultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up with them or make them move . 
On the one hand , the chief steward put the state of things to him in the very worst light , pointing out the necessity of paying off the debts and undertaking new activities with serf labor , to which Pierre did not agree . 
On the other hand , Pierre demanded that steps should be taken to liberate the serfs , which the steward met by showing the necessity of first paying off the loans from the Land Bank , and the consequent impossibility of a speedy emancipation . 
The steward did not say it was quite impossible , but suggested selling the forests in the province of Kostroma , the land lower down the river , and the Crimean estate , in order to make it possible : all of which operations according to him were connected with such complicated measures -- the removal of injunctions , petitions , permits , and so on -- that Pierre became quite bewildered and only replied : `` Yes , yes , do so . '' 
Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabled him to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and only tried to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it . 
The steward for his part tried to pretend to the count that he considered these consultations very valuable for the proprietor and troublesome to himself . 
In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew , and strangers hastened to make his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer , the largest landowner of the province . 
Temptations to Pierre 's greatest weakness -- the one to which he had confessed when admitted to the Lodge -- were so strong that he could not resist them . 
Again whole days , weeks , and months of his life passed in as great a rush and were as much occupied with evening parties , dinners , lunches , and balls , giving him no time for reflection , as in Petersburg . 
Instead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the old life , only in new surroundings . 
Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did not fulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example of moral life , and that of the seven virtues he lacked two -- morality and the love of death . 
He consoled himself with the thought that he fulfilled another of the precepts -- that of reforming the human race - and had other virtues -- love of his neighbor , and especially generosity . 
In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg . 
On the way he intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far his orders had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whom God had entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit . 
The chief steward , who considered the young count 's attempts almost insane -- unprofitable to himself , to the count , and to the serfs -- made some concessions . 
Continuing to represent the liberation of the serfs as impracticable , he arranged for the erection of large buildings -- schools , hospitals , and asylums -- on all the estates before the master arrived . 
Everywhere preparations were made not for ceremonious welcomes -LRB- which he knew Pierre would not like -RRB- , but for just such gratefully religious ones , with offerings of icons and the bread and salt of hospitality , as , according to his understanding of his master , would touch and delude him . 
The southern spring , the comfortable rapid traveling in a Vienna carriage , and the solitude of the road , all had a gladdening effect on Pierre . 
The estates he had not before visited were each more picturesque than the other ; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving and touchingly grateful for the benefits conferred on them . 
Everywhere were receptions , which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened a joyful feeling in the depth of his heart . 
In one place the peasants presented him with bread and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saint Paul , asking permission , as a mark of their gratitude for the benefits he had conferred on them , to build a new chantry to the church at their own expense in honor of Peter and Paul , his patron saints . 
In another place the women with infants in arms met him to thank him for releasing them from hard work . 
On a third estate the priest , bearing a cross , came to meet him surrounded by children whom , by the count 's generosity , he was instructing in reading , writing , and religion . 
On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brick buildings erected or in course of erection , all on one plan , for hospitals , schools , and almshouses , which were soon to be opened . 
Everywhere he saw the stewards ' accounts , according to which the serfs ' manorial labor had been diminished , and heard the touching thanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue coats . 
What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented him with bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peter and Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter 's day , and that the richest peasants -LRB- who formed the deputation -RRB- had begun the chantry long before , but that nine tenths of the peasants in that villages were in a state of the greatest poverty . 
He did not know that since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on his land , they did still harder work on their own land . 
He did not know that the priest who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants by his exactions , and that the pupils ' parents wept at having to let him take their children and secured their release by heavy payments . 
He did not know that the brick buildings , built to plan , were being built by serfs whose manorial labor was thus increased , though lessened on paper . 
He did not know that where the steward had shown him in the accounts that the serfs ' payments had been diminished by a third , their obligatory manorial work had been increased by a half . 
And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his estates and quite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had left Petersburg , and wrote enthusiastic letters to his `` brother-instructor '' as he called the Grand Master . 
`` How easy it is , how little effort it needs , to do so much good , '' thought Pierre , `` and how little attention we pay to it ! '' 
He was pleased at the gratitude he received , but felt abashed at receiving it . 
This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might do for these simple , kindly people . 
The chief steward , a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectly through the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with a toy , seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre , pressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and above all the uselessness of freeing the serfs , who were quite happy as it was . 
Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would be difficult to imagine happier people , and that God only knew what would happen to them when they were free , but he insisted , though reluctantly , on what he thought right . 
The steward promised to do all in his power to carry out the count 's wishes , seeing clearly that not only would the count never be able to find out whether all measures had been taken for the sale of the land and forests and to release them from the Land Bank , but would probably never even inquire and would never know that the newly erected buildings were standing empty and that the serfs continued to give in money and work all that other people 's serfs gave -- that is to say , all that could be got out of them . 
Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiest state of mind , Pierre carried out an intention he had long had of visiting his friend Bolkonski , whom he had not seen for two years . 
Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country among fields and forests of fir and birch , which were partly cut down . 
The house lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink and with banks still bare of grass . 
It was at the end of a village that stretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in which were a few fir trees . 
The homestead consisted of a threshing floor , outhouses , stables , a bathhouse , a lodge , and a large brick house with semicircular facade still in course of construction . 
Round the house was a garden newly laid out . 
The fences and gates were new and solid ; two fire pumps and a water cart , painted green , stood in a shed ; the paths were straight , the bridges were strong and had handrails . 
Everything bore an impress of tidiness and good management . 
Some domestic serfs Pierre met , in reply to inquiries as to where the prince lived , pointed out a small newly built lodge close to the pond . 
Anton , a man who had looked after Prince Andrew in his boyhood , helped Pierre out of his carriage , said that the prince was at home , and showed him into a clean little anteroom . 
Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean house after the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friend in Petersburg . 
He quickly entered the small reception room with its still-unplastered wooden walls redolent of pine , and would have gone farther , but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door . 
`` Well , what is it ? '' 
came a sharp , unpleasant voice . 
`` A visitor , '' answered Anton . 
`` Ask him to wait , '' and the sound was heard of a chair being pushed back . 
Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face to face with Prince Andrew , who came out frowning and looking old . 
Pierre embraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheek and looked at him closely . 
`` Well , I did not expect you , I am very glad , '' said Prince Andrew . 
Pierre said nothing ; he looked fixedly at his friend with surprise . 
He was struck by the change in him . 
His words were kindly and there was a smile on his lips and face , but his eyes were dull and lifeless and in spite of his evident wish to do so he could not give them a joyous and glad sparkle . 
Prince Andrew had grown thinner , paler , and more manly-looking , but what amazed and estranged Pierre till he got used to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his brow indicating prolonged concentration on some one thought . 
As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolonged separation , it was long before their conversation could settle on anything . 
They put questions and gave brief replies about things they knew ought to be talked over at length . 
At last the conversation gradually settled on some of the topics at first lightly touched on : their past life , plans for the future , Pierre 's journeys and occupations , the war , and so on . 
The preoccupation and despondency which Pierre had noticed in his friend 's look was now still more clearly expressed in the smile with which he listened to Pierre , especially when he spoke with joyful animation of the past or the future . 
It was as if Prince Andrew would have liked to sympathize with what Pierre was saying , but could not . 
The latter began to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his enthusiasms , dreams , and hopes of happiness or goodness , in Prince Andrew 's presence . 
He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views , which had been particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour . 
He checked himself , fearing to seem naive , yet he felt an irresistible desire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now a quite different , and better , Pierre than he had been in Petersburg . 
`` I ca n't tell you how much I have lived through since then . 
I hardly know myself again . '' 
`` Yes , we have altered much , very much , since then , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Well , and you ? 
What are your plans ? '' 
`` Plans ! '' 
repeated Prince Andrew ironically . 
`` My plans ? '' 
he said , as if astonished at the word . 
`` Well , you see , I 'm building . 
I mean to settle here altogether next year ... '' Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew 's face , which had grown much older . 
`` No , I meant to ask ... '' Pierre began , but Prince Andrew interrupted him . 
`` But why talk of me ? 
... Talk to me , yes , tell me about your travels and all you have been doing on your estates . '' 
Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates , trying as far as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that had been made . 
Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre 's story of what he had been doing , as though it were all an old-time story , and he listened not only without interest but even as if ashamed of what Pierre was telling him . 
Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend 's company and at last became silent . 
`` I 'll tell you what , my dear fellow , '' said Prince Andrew , who evidently also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor , `` I am only bivouacking here and have just come to look round . 
I am going back to my sister today . 
I will introduce you to her . 
But of course you know her already , '' he said , evidently trying to entertain a visitor with whom he now found nothing in common . 
`` We will go after dinner . 
And would you now like to look round my place ? '' 
They went out and walked about till dinnertime , talking of the political news and common acquaintances like people who do not know each other intimately . 
Prince Andrew spoke with some animation and interest only of the new homestead he was constructing and its buildings , but even here , while on the scaffolding , in the midst of a talk explaining the future arrangements of the house , he interrupted himself : `` However , this is not at all interesting . 
Let us have dinner , and then we 'll set off . '' 
At dinner , conversation turned on Pierre 's marriage . 
`` I was very much surprised when I heard of it , '' said Prince Andrew . 
Pierre blushed , as he always did when it was mentioned , and said hurriedly : `` I will tell you some time how it all happened . 
But you know it is all over , and forever . '' 
`` Forever ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` Nothing 's forever . '' 
`` But you know how it all ended , do n't you ? 
You heard of the duel ? '' 
`` And so you had to go through that too ! '' 
`` One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man , '' said Pierre . 
`` Why so ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew . 
`` To kill a vicious dog is a very good thing really . '' 
`` No , to kill a man is bad -- wrong . '' 
`` Why is it wrong ? '' 
urged Prince Andrew . 
`` It is not given to man to know what is right and what is wrong . 
Men always did and always will err , and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong . '' 
`` What does harm to another is wrong , '' said Pierre , feeling with pleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew was roused , had begun to talk , and wanted to express what had brought him to his present state . 
`` And who has told you what is bad for another man ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Bad ! 
Bad ! '' 
exclaimed Pierre . 
`` We all know what is bad for ourselves . '' 
`` Yes , we know that , but the harm I am conscious of in myself is something I can not inflict on others , '' said Prince Andrew , growing more and more animated and evidently wishing to express his new outlook to Pierre . 
He spoke in French . 
`` I only know two very real evils in life : remorse and illness . 
The only good is the absence of those evils . 
To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my whole philosophy now . '' 
`` And love of one 's neighbor , and self-sacrifice ? '' 
began Pierre . 
`` No , I ca n't agree with you ! 
To live only so as not to do evil and not to have to repent is not enough . 
I lived like that , I lived for myself and ruined my life . 
And only now when I am living , or at least trying '' -LRB- Pierre 's modesty made him correct himself -RRB- `` to live for others , only now have I understood all the happiness of life . 
No , I shall not agree with you , and you do not really believe what you are saying . '' 
Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile . 
`` When you see my sister , Princess Mary , you 'll get on with her , '' he said . 
`` Perhaps you are right for yourself , '' he added after a short pause , `` but everyone lives in his own way . 
You lived for yourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only found happiness when you began living for others . 
I experienced just the reverse . 
I lived for glory . 
-- And after all what is glory ? 
The same love of others , a desire to do something for them , a desire for their approval . 
-- So I lived for others , and not almost , but quite , ruined my life . 
And I have become calmer since I began to live only for myself . '' 
`` But what do you mean by living only for yourself ? '' 
asked Pierre , growing excited . 
`` What about your son , your sister , and your father ? '' 
`` But that 's just the same as myself -- they are not others , '' explained Prince Andrew . 
`` The others , one 's neighbors , le prochain , as you and Princess Mary call it , are the chief source of all error and evil . 
Le prochain -- your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good . '' 
And he looked at Pierre with a mocking , challenging expression . 
He evidently wished to draw him on . 
`` You are joking , '' replied Pierre , growing more and more excited . 
`` What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good , and even doing a little -- though I did very little and did it very badly ? 
What evil can there be in it if unfortunate people , our serfs , people like ourselves , were growing up and dying with no idea of God and truth beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructed in a comforting belief in future life , retribution , recompense , and consolation ? 
What evil and error are there in it , if people were dying of disease without help while material assistance could so easily be rendered , and I supplied them with a doctor , a hospital , and an asylum for the aged ? 
And is it not a palpable , unquestionable good if a peasant , or a woman with a baby , has no rest day or night and I give them rest and leisure ? '' 
said Pierre , hurrying and lisping . 
`` And I have done that though badly and to a small extent ; but I have done something toward it and you can not persuade me that it was not a good action , and more than that , you ca n't make me believe that you do not think so yourself . 
And the main thing is , '' he continued , `` that I know , and know for certain , that the enjoyment of doing this good is the only sure happiness in life . '' 
`` Yes , if you put it like that it 's quite a different matter , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` I build a house and lay out a garden , and you build hospitals . 
The one and the other may serve as a pastime . 
But what 's right and what 's good must be judged by one who knows all , but not by us . 
Well , you want an argument , '' he added , `` come on then . '' 
They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch which served as a veranda . 
`` Come , let 's argue then , '' said Prince Andrew , `` You talk of schools , '' he went on , crooking a finger , `` education and so forth ; that is , you want to raise him '' -LRB- pointing to a peasant who passed by them taking off his cap -RRB- `` from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritual needs , while it seems to me that animal happiness is the only happiness possible , and that is just what you want to deprive him of . 
I envy him , but you want to make him what I am , without giving him my means . 
Then you say , ` lighten his toil . ' 
But as I see it , physical labor is as essential to him , as much a condition of his existence , as mental activity is to you or me . 
You ca n't help thinking . 
I go to bed after two in the morning , thoughts come and I ca n't sleep but toss about till dawn , because I think and ca n't help thinking , just as he ca n't help plowing and mowing ; if he did n't , he would go to the drink shop or fall ill . 
Just as I could not stand his terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week , so he could not stand my physical idleness , but would grow fat and die . 
The third thing -- what else was it you talked about ? '' 
and Prince Andrew crooked a third finger . 
`` Ah , yes , hospitals , medicine . 
He has a fit , he is dying , and you come and bleed him and patch him up . 
He will drag about as a cripple , a burden to everybody , for another ten years . 
It would be far easier and simpler for him to die . 
Others are being born and there are plenty of them as it is . 
It would be different if you grudged losing a laborer -- that 's how I regard him -- but you want to cure him from love of him . 
And he does not want that . 
And besides , what a notion that medicine ever cured anyone ! 
Killed them , yes ! '' 
said he , frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre . 
Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly that it was evident he had reflected on this subject more than once , and he spoke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a long time . 
His glance became more animated as his conclusions became more hopeless . 
`` Oh , that is dreadful , dreadful ! '' 
said Pierre . 
`` I do n't understand how one can live with such ideas . 
I had such moments myself not long ago , in Moscow and when traveling , but at such times I collapsed so that I do n't live at all -- everything seems hateful to me ... myself most of all . 
Then I do n't eat , do n't wash ... and how is it with you ? 
... '' `` Why not wash ? 
That is not cleanly , '' said Prince Andrew ; `` on the contrary one must try to make one 's life as pleasant as possible . 
I 'm alive , that is not my fault , so I must live out my life as best I can without hurting others . '' 
`` But with such ideas what motive have you for living ? 
One would sit without moving , undertaking nothing ... '' `` Life as it is leaves one no peace . 
I should be thankful to do nothing , but here on the one hand the local nobility have done me the honor to choose me to be their marshal ; it was all I could do to get out of it . 
They could not understand that I have not the necessary qualifications for it -- the kind of good-natured , fussy shallowness necessary for the position . 
Then there 's this house , which must be built in order to have a nook of one 's own in which to be quiet . 
And now there 's this recruiting . '' 
`` Why are n't you serving in the army ? '' 
`` After Austerlitz ! '' 
said Prince Andrew gloomily . 
`` No , thank you very much ! 
I have promised myself not to serve again in the active Russian army . 
And I wo n't -- not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolensk threatening Bald Hills -- even then I would n't serve in the Russian army ! 
Well , as I was saying , '' he continued , recovering his composure , `` now there 's this recruiting . 
My father is chief in command of the Third District , and my only way of avoiding active service is to serve under him . '' 
`` Then you are serving ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
He paused a little while . 
`` And why do you serve ? '' 
`` Why , for this reason ! 
My father is one of the most remarkable men of his time . 
But he is growing old , and though not exactly cruel he has too energetic a character . 
He is so accustomed to unlimited power that he is terrible , and now he has this authority of a commander in chief of the recruiting , granted by the Emperor . 
If I had been two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster 's clerk at Yukhnovna hanged , '' said Prince Andrew with a smile . 
`` So I am serving because I alone have any influence with my father , and now and then can save him from actions which would torment him afterwards . '' 
`` Well , there you see ! '' 
`` Yes , but it is not as you imagine , '' Prince Andrew continued . 
`` I did not , and do not , in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk who had stolen some boots from the recruits ; I should even have been very glad to see him hanged , but I was sorry for my father -- that again is for myself . '' 
Prince Andrew grew more and more animated . 
His eyes glittered feverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions there was no desire to do good to his neighbor . 
`` There now , you wish to liberate your serfs , '' he continued ; `` that is a very good thing , but not for you -- I do n't suppose you ever had anyone flogged or sent to Siberia -- and still less for your serfs . 
If they are beaten , flogged , or sent to Siberia , I do n't suppose they are any the worse off . 
In Siberia they lead the same animal life , and the stripes on their bodies heal , and they are happy as before . 
But it is a good thing for proprietors who perish morally , bring remorse upon themselves , stifle this remorse and grow callous , as a result of being able to inflict punishments justly and unjustly . 
It is those people I pity , and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs . 
You may not have seen , but I have seen , how good men brought up in those traditions of unlimited power , in time when they grow more irritable , become cruel and harsh , are conscious of it , but can not restrain themselves and grow more and more miserable . '' 
Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinking that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by his father 's case . 
He did not reply . 
`` So that 's what I 'm sorry for -- human dignity , peace of mind , purity , and not the serfs ' backs and foreheads , which , beat and shave as you may , always remain the same backs and foreheads . '' 
`` No , no ! 
A thousand times no ! 
I shall never agree with you , '' said Pierre . 
In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage and drove to Bald Hills . 
Prince Andrew , glancing at Pierre , broke the silence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a good temper . 
Pointing to the fields , he spoke of the improvements he was making in his husbandry . 
Pierre remained gloomily silent , answering in monosyllables and apparently immersed in his own thoughts . 
He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy , had gone astray , did not see the true light , and that he , Pierre , ought to aid , enlighten , and raise him . 
But as soon as he thought of what he should say , he felt that Prince Andrew with one word , one argument , would upset all his teaching , and he shrank from beginning , afraid of exposing to possible ridicule what to him was precious and sacred . 
`` No , but why do you think so ? '' 
Pierre suddenly began , lowering his head and looking like a bull about to charge , `` why do you think so ? 
You should not think so . '' 
`` Think ? 
What about ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew with surprise . 
`` About life , about man 's destiny . 
It ca n't be so . 
I myself thought like that , and do you know what saved me ? 
Freemasonry ! 
No , do n't smile . 
Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect , as I thought it was : Freemasonry is the best expression of the best , the eternal , aspects of humanity . '' 
And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Prince Andrew . 
He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freed from the bonds of State and Church , a teaching of equality , brotherhood , and love . 
`` Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life , all the rest is a dream , '' said Pierre . 
`` Understand , my dear fellow , that outside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agree with you that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but to live out his life , like you , merely trying not to harm others . 
But make our fundamental convictions your own , join our brotherhood , give yourself up to us , let yourself be guided , and you will at once feel yourself , as I have felt myself , a part of that vast invisible chain the beginning of which is hidden in heaven , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew , looking straight in front of him , listened in silence to Pierre 's words . 
More than once , when the noise of the wheels prevented his catching what Pierre said , he asked him to repeat it , and by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew 's eyes and by his silence , Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and that Prince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said . 
They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which they had to cross by ferry . 
While the carriage and horses were being placed on it , they also stepped on the raft . 
Prince Andrew , leaning his arms on the raft railing , gazed silently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun . 
`` Well , what do you think about it ? '' 
Pierre asked . 
`` Why are you silent ? '' 
`` What do I think about it ? 
I am listening to you . 
It 's all very well ... . 
You say : join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim of life , the destiny of man , and the laws which govern the world . 
But who are we ? 
Men . 
How is it you know everything ? 
Why do I alone not see what you see ? 
You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth , but I do n't see it . '' 
Pierre interrupted him . 
`` Do you believe in a future life ? '' 
he asked . 
`` A future life ? '' 
Prince Andrew repeated , but Pierre , giving him no time to reply , took the repetition for a denial , the more readily as he knew Prince Andrew 's former atheistic convictions . 
`` You say you ca n't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth . 
Nor could I , and it can not be seen if one looks on our life here as the end of everything . 
On earth , here on this earth '' -LRB- Pierre pointed to the fields -RRB- , `` there is no truth , all is false and evil ; but in the universe , in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth , and we who are now the children of earth are -- eternally -- children of the whole universe . 
Do n't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vast harmonious whole ? 
Do n't I feel that I form one link , one step , between the lower and higher beings , in this vast harmonious multitude of beings in whom the Deity -- the Supreme Power if you prefer the term -- is manifest ? 
If I see , clearly see , that ladder leading from plant to man , why should I suppose it breaks off at me and does not go farther and farther ? 
I feel that I can not vanish , since nothing vanishes in this world , but that I shall always exist and always have existed . 
I feel that beyond me and above me there are spirits , and that in this world there is truth . '' 
`` Yes , that is Herder 's theory , '' said Prince Andrew , `` but it is not that which can convince me , dear friend -- life and death are what convince . 
What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one , bound up with one 's own life , before whom one was to blame and had hoped to make it right '' -LRB- Prince Andrew 's voice trembled and he turned away -RRB- , `` and suddenly that being is seized with pain , suffers , and ceases to exist ... . 
Why ? 
It can not be that there is no answer . 
And I believe there is ... . 
That 's what convinces , that is what has convinced me , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` Yes , yes , of course , '' said Pierre , `` is n't that what I 'm saying ? '' 
`` No . 
All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of the necessity of a future life , but this : when you go hand in hand with someone and all at once that person vanishes there , into nowhere , and you yourself are left facing that abyss , and look in . 
And I have looked in ... '' `` Well , that 's it then ! 
You know that there is a there and there is a Someone ? 
There is the future life . 
The Someone is -- God . '' 
Prince Andrew did not reply . 
The carriage and horses had long since been taken off , onto the farther bank , and reharnessed . 
The sun had sunk half below the horizon and an evening frost was starring the puddles near the ferry , but Pierre and Andrew , to the astonishment of the footmen , coachmen , and ferrymen , still stood on the raft and talked . 
`` If there is a God and future life , there is truth and good , and man 's highest happiness consists in striving to attain them . 
We must live , we must love , and we must believe that we live not only today on this scrap of earth , but have lived and shall live forever , there , in the Whole , '' said Pierre , and he pointed to the sky . 
Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listening to Pierre , and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection of the sun gleaming on the blue waters . 
There was perfect stillness . 
Pierre became silent . 
The raft had long since stopped and only the waves of the current beat softly against it below . 
Prince Andrew felt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre 's words , whispering : `` It is true , believe it . '' 
He sighed , and glanced with a radiant , childlike , tender look at Pierre 's face , flushed and rapturous , but yet shy before his superior friend . 
`` Yes , if it only were so ! '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` However , it is time to get on , '' he added , and , stepping off the raft , he looked up at the sky to which Pierre had pointed , and for the first time since Austerlitz saw that high , everlasting sky he had seen while lying on that battlefield ; and something that had long been slumbering , something that was best within him , suddenly awoke , joyful and youthful , in his soul . 
It vanished as soon as he returned to the customary conditions of his life , but he knew that this feeling which he did not know how to develop existed within him . 
His meeting with Pierre formed an epoch in Prince Andrew 's life . 
Though outwardly he continued to live in the same old way , inwardly he began a new life . 
It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to the front entrance of the house at Bald Hills . 
As they approached the house , Prince Andrew with asmile drew Pierre 's attention to a commotion going on at the back porch . 
A woman , bent with age , with a wallet on her back , and a short , long-haired , young man in a black garment had rushed back to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up . 
Two women ran out after them , and all four , looking round at the carriage , ran in dismay up the steps of the back porch . 
`` Those are Mary 's ` God 's folk , ' '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` They have mistaken us for my father . 
This is the one matter in which she disobeys him . 
He orders these pilgrims to be driven away , but she receives them . '' 
`` But what are ` God 's folk ' ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
Prince Andrew had no time to answer . 
The servants came out to meet them , and he asked where the old prince was and whether he was expected back soon . 
The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back any minute . 
Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments , which were always kept in perfect order and readiness for him in his father 's house ; he himself went to the nursery . 
`` Let us go and see my sister , '' he said to Pierre when he returned . 
`` I have not found her yet , she is hiding now , sitting with her ` God 's folk . ' 
It will serve her right , she will be confused , but you will see her ` God 's folk . ' 
It 's really very curious . '' 
`` What are ` God 's folk ' ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` Come , and you 'll see for yourself . '' 
Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on her face when they went in . 
In her snug room , with lamps burning before the icon stand , a young lad with a long nose and long hair , wearing a monk 's cassock , sat on the sofa beside her , behind a samovar . 
Near them , in an armchair , sat a thin , shriveled , old woman , with a meek expression on her childlike face . 
`` Andrew , why did n't you warn me ? '' 
said the princess , with mild reproach , as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before her chickens . 
`` Charmee de vous voir . 
Je suis tres contente de vous voir , '' * she said to Pierre as he kissed her hand . 
She had known him as a child , and now his friendship with Andrew , his misfortune with his wife , and above all his kindly , simple face disposed her favorably toward him . 
She looked at him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed to say , `` I like you very much , but please do n't laugh at my people . '' 
After exchanging the first greetings , they sat down . 
* `` Delighted to see you . 
I am very glad to see you . '' 
`` Ah , and Ivanushka is here too ! '' 
said Prince Andrew , glancing with a smile at the young pilgrim . 
`` Andrew ! '' 
said Princess Mary , imploringly . 
`` Il faut que vous sachiez que c'est une femme , '' * said Prince Andrew to Pierre . 
`` Andrew , au nom de Dieu ! '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- Princess Mary repeated . 
* `` You must know that this is a woman . '' 
* -LSB- 2 -RSB- `` For heaven 's sake . '' 
It was evident that Prince Andrew 's ironical tone toward the pilgrims and Princess Mary 's helpless attempts to protect them were their customary long-established relations on the matter . 
`` Mais , ma bonne amie , '' said Prince Andrew , `` vous devriez au contraire m ` etre reconnaissante de ce que j' explique a Pierre votre intimite avec ce jeune homme . '' 
* * `` But , my dear , you ought on the contrary to be grateful to me for explaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young man . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
said Pierre , gazing over his spectacles with curiosity and seriousness -LRB- for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him -RRB- into Ivanushka 's face , who , seeing that she was being spoken about , looked round at them all with crafty eyes . 
