The bearded man 's revolver cracked and the looking-glass at the back of the parlour starred and came smashing and tinkling down . 
As the barman entered the room he saw Marvel , curiously crumpled up and struggling against the door that led to the yard and kitchen . 
The door flew open while the barman hesitated , and Marvel was dragged into the kitchen . 
There was a scream and a clatter of pans . 
Marvel , head down , and lugging back obstinately , was forced to the kitchen door , and the bolts were drawn . 
Then the policeman , who had been trying to pass the barman , rushed in , followed by one of the cabmen , gripped the wrist of the invisible hand that collared Marvel , was hit in the face and went reeling back . 
The door opened , and Marvel made a frantic effort to obtain a lodgment behind it . 
Then the cabman collared something . 
`` I got him , '' said the cabman . 
The barman 's red hands came clawing at the unseen . 
`` Here he is ! '' 
said the barman . 
Mr. Marvel , released , suddenly dropped to the ground and made an attempt to crawl behind the legs of the fighting men . 
The struggle blundered round the edge of the door . 
The voice of the Invisible Man was heard for the first time , yelling out sharply , as the policeman trod on his foot . 
Then he cried out passionately and his fists flew round like flails . 
The cabman suddenly whooped and doubled up , kicked under the diaphragm . 
The door into the bar-parlour from the kitchen slammed and covered Mr. Marvel 's retreat . 
The men in the kitchen found themselves clutching at and struggling with empty air . 
`` Where 's he gone ? '' 
cried the man with the beard . 
`` Out ? '' 
`` This way , '' said the policeman , stepping into the yard and stopping . 
A piece of tile whizzed by his head and smashed among the crockery on the kitchen table . 
`` I 'll show him , '' shouted the man with the black beard , and suddenly a steel barrel shone over the policeman 's shoulder , and five bullets had followed one another into the twilight whence the missile had come . 
As he fired , the man with the beard moved his hand in a horizontal curve , so that his shots radiated out into the narrow yard like spokes from a wheel . 
A silence followed . 
`` Five cartridges , '' said the man with the black beard . 
`` That 's the best of all . 
Four aces and a joker . 
Get a lantern , someone , and come and feel about for his body . '' 
DR. KEMP 'S VISITOR Dr. Kemp had continued writing in his study until the shots aroused him . 
Crack , crack , crack , they came one after the other . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said Dr. Kemp , putting his pen into his mouth again and listening . 
`` Who 's letting off revolvers in Burdock ? 
What are the asses at now ? '' 
He went to the south window , threw it up , and leaning out stared down on the network of windows , beaded gas-lamps and shops , with its black interstices of roof and yard that made up the town at night . 
`` Looks like a crowd down the hill , '' he said , `` by ` The Cricketers , ' '' and remained watching . 
Thence his eyes wandered over the town to far away where the ships ' lights shone , and the pier glowed -- a little illuminated , facetted pavilion like a gem of yellow light . 
The moon in its first quarter hung over the westward hill , and the stars were clear and almost tropically bright . 
After five minutes , during which his mind had travelled into a remote speculation of social conditions of the future , and lost itself at last over the time dimension , Dr. Kemp roused himself with a sigh , pulled down the window again , and returned to his writing desk . 
It must have been about an hour after this that the front-door bell rang . 
He had been writing slackly , and with intervals of abstraction , since the shots . 
He sat listening . 
He heard the servant answer the door , and waited for her feet on the staircase , but she did not come . 
`` Wonder what that was , '' said Dr. Kemp . 
He tried to resume his work , failed , got up , went downstairs from his study to the landing , rang , and called over the balustrade to the housemaid as she appeared in the hall below . 
`` Was that a letter ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Only a runaway ring , sir , '' she answered . 
`` I 'm restless to-night , '' he said to himself . 
He went back to his study , and this time attacked his work resolutely . 
In a little while he was hard at work again , and the only sounds in the room were the ticking of the clock and the subdued shrillness of his quill , hurrying in the very centre of the circle of light his lampshade threw on his table . 
It was two o'clock before Dr. Kemp had finished his work for the night . 
He rose , yawned , and went downstairs to bed . 
He had already removed his coat and vest , when he noticed that he was thirsty . 
He took a candle and went down to the dining-room in search of a syphon and whiskey . 
Dr. Kemp 's scientific pursuits have made him a very observant man , and as he recrossed the hall , he noticed a dark spot on the linoleum near the mat at the foot of the stairs . 
He went on upstairs , and then it suddenly occurred to him to ask himself what the spot on the linoleum might be . 
Apparently some subconscious element was at work . 
At any rate , he turned with his burden , went back to the hall , put down the syphon and whiskey , and bending down , touched the spot . 
Without any great surprise he found it had the stickiness and colour of drying blood . 
He took up his burden again , and returned upstairs , looking about him and trying to account for the blood-spot . 
On the landing he saw something and stopped astonished . 
The door-handle of his own room was blood-stained . 
He looked at his own hand . 
It was quite clean , and then he remembered that the door of his room had been open when he came down from his study , and that consequently he had not touched the handle at all . 
He went straight into his room , his face quite calm -- perhaps a trifle more resolute than usual . 
His glance , wandering inquisitively , fell on the bed . 
On the counterpane was a mess of blood , and the sheet had been torn . 
He had not noticed this before because he had walked straight to the dressing-table . 
On the further side the bedclothes were depressed as if someone had been recently sitting there . 
Then he had an odd impression that he had heard a low voice say , `` Good Heavens ! 
-- Kemp ! '' 
But Dr. Kemp was no believer in voices . 
He stood staring at the tumbled sheets . 
Was that really a voice ? 
He looked about again , but noticed nothing further than the disordered and blood-stained bed . 
Then he distinctly heard a movement across the room , near the wash-hand stand . 
All men , however highly educated , retain some superstitious inklings . 
The feeling that is called `` eerie '' came upon him . 
He closed the door of the room , came forward to the dressing-table , and put down his burdens . 
Suddenly , with a start , he perceived a coiled and blood-stained bandage of linen rag hanging in mid-air , between him and the wash-hand stand . 
He stared at this in amazement . 
It was an empty bandage , a bandage properly tied but quite empty . 
He would have advanced to grasp it , but a touch arrested him , and a voice speaking quite close to him . 
`` Kemp ! '' 
said the Voice . 
`` Eh ? '' 
said Kemp , with his mouth open . 
`` Keep your nerve , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 'm an Invisible Man . '' 
Kemp made no answer for a space , simply stared at the bandage . 
`` Invisible Man , '' he said . 
`` I am an Invisible Man , '' repeated the Voice . 
The story he had been active to ridicule only that morning rushed through Kemp 's brain . 
He does not appear to have been either very much frightened or very greatly surprised at the moment . 
Realisation came later . 
`` I thought it was all a lie , '' he said . 
