Interrogative cough . 
` How the devil , ' said I , ` can you move an empty sleeve like that ? ' 
'Em pty sleeve ? ' 
` Yes , ' said I , ` an empty sleeve . ' '' 
` It 's an empty sleeve , is it ? 
You saw it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
He stood up right away . 
I stood up too . 
He came towards me in three very slow steps , and stood quite close . 
Sniffed venomously . 
I did n't flinch , though I 'm hanged if that bandaged knob of his , and those blinkers , are n't enough to unnerve any one , coming quietly up to you . '' 
` You said it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
he said . 
` Certainly , ' I said . 
At staring and saying nothing a barefaced man , unspectacled , starts scratch . 
Then very quietly he pulled his sleeve out of his pocket again , and raised his arm towards me as though he would show it to me again . 
He did it very , very slowly . 
I looked at it . 
Seemed an age . 
` Well ? ' 
said I , clearing my throat , ` there 's nothing in it . ' 
`` Had to say something . 
I was beginning to feel frightened . 
I could see right down it . 
He extended it straight towards me , slowly , slowly -- just like that -- until the cuff was six inches from my face . 
Queer thing to see an empty sleeve come at you like that ! 
And then -- '' `` Well ? '' 
`` Something -- exactly like a finger and thumb it felt -- nipped my nose . '' 
Bunting began to laugh . 
`` There was n't anything there ! '' 
said Cuss , his voice running up into a shriek at the `` there . '' 
`` It 's all very well for you to laugh , but I tell you I was so startled , I hit his cuff hard , and turned around , and cut out of the room -- I left him -- '' Cuss stopped . 
There was no mistaking the sincerity of his panic . 
He turned round in a helpless way and took a second glass of the excellent vicar 's very inferior sherry . 
`` When I hit his cuff , '' said Cuss , `` I tell you , it felt exactly like hitting an arm . 
And there was n't an arm ! 
There was n't the ghost of an arm ! '' 
Mr. Bunting thought it over . 
He looked suspiciously at Cuss . 
`` It 's a most remarkable story , '' he said . 
He looked very wise and grave indeed . 
`` It 's really , '' said Mr. Bunting with judicial emphasis , `` a most remarkable story . '' 
THE BURGLARY AT THE VICARAGE The facts of the burglary at the vicarage came to us chiefly through the medium of the vicar and his wife . 
It occurred in the small hours of Whit Monday , the day devoted in Iping to the Club festivities . 
Mrs. Bunting , it seems , woke up suddenly in the stillness that comes before the dawn , with the strong impression that the door of their bedroom had opened and closed . 
She did not arouse her husband at first , but sat up in bed listening . 
She then distinctly heard the pad , pad , pad of bare feet coming out of the adjoining dressing-room and walking along the passage towards the staircase . 
As soon as she felt assured of this , she aroused the Rev. Mr. Bunting as quietly as possible . 
He did not strike a light , but putting on his spectacles , her dressing-gown and his bath slippers , he went out on the landing to listen . 
He heard quite distinctly a fumbling going on at his study desk down-stairs , and then a violent sneeze . 
At that he returned to his bedroom , armed himself with the most obvious weapon , the poker , and descended the staircase as noiselessly as possible . 
Mrs. Bunting came out on the landing . 
The hour was about four , and the ultimate darkness of the night was past . 
There was a faint shimmer of light in the hall , but the study doorway yawned impenetrably black . 
Everything was still except the faint creaking of the stairs under Mr. Bunting 's tread , and the slight movements in the study . 
Then something snapped , the drawer was opened , and there was a rustle of papers . 
Then came an imprecation , and a match was struck and the study was flooded with yellow light . 
Mr. Bunting was now in the hall , and through the crack of the door he could see the desk and the open drawer and a candle burning on the desk . 
But the robber he could not see . 
He stood there in the hall undecided what to do , and Mrs. Bunting , her face white and intent , crept slowly downstairs after him . 
One thing kept Mr. Bunting 's courage ; the persuasion that this burglar was a resident in the village . 
They heard the chink of money , and realised that the robber had found the housekeeping reserve of gold -- two pounds ten in half sovereigns altogether . 
At that sound Mr. Bunting was nerved to abrupt action . 
Gripping the poker firmly , he rushed into the room , closely followed by Mrs. Bunting . 
`` Surrender ! '' 
cried Mr. Bunting , fiercely , and then stooped amazed . 
Apparently the room was perfectly empty . 
Yet their conviction that they had , that very moment , heard somebody moving in the room had amounted to a certainty . 
For half a minute , perhaps , they stood gaping , then Mrs. Bunting went across the room and looked behind the screen , while Mr. Bunting , by a kindred impulse , peered under the desk . 
Then Mrs. Bunting turned back the window-curtains , and Mr. Bunting looked up the chimney and probed it with the poker . 
Then Mrs. Bunting scrutinised the waste-paper basket and Mr. Bunting opened the lid of the coal-scuttle . 
Then they came to a stop and stood with eyes interrogating each other . 
`` I could have sworn -- '' said Mr. Bunting . 
`` The candle ! '' 
said Mr. Bunting . 
`` Who lit the candle ? '' 
`` The drawer ! '' 
said Mrs. Bunting . 
`` And the money 's gone ! '' 
She went hastily to the doorway . 
`` Of all the strange occurrences -- '' There was a violent sneeze in the passage . 
They rushed out , and as they did so the kitchen door slammed . 
`` Bring the candle , '' said Mr. Bunting , and led the way . 
They both heard a sound of bolts being hastily shot back . 
As he opened the kitchen door he saw through the scullery that the back door was just opening , and the faint light of early dawn displayed the dark masses of the garden beyond . 
He is certain that nothing went out of the door . 
It opened , stood open for a moment , and then closed with a slam . 
As it did so , the candle Mrs. Bunting was carrying from the study flickered and flared . 
It was a minute or more before they entered the kitchen . 
The place was empty . 
They refastened the back door , examined the kitchen , pantry , and scullery thoroughly , and at last went down into the cellar . 
There was not a soul to be found in the house , search as they would . 
Daylight found the vicar and his wife , a quaintly-costumed little couple , still marvelling about on their own ground floor by the unnecessary light of a guttering candle . 
THE FURNITURE THAT WENT MAD Now it happened that in the early hours of Whit Monday , before Millie was hunted out for the day , Mr. Hall and Mrs. Hall both rose and went noiselessly down into the cellar . 
Their business there was of a private nature , and had something to do with the specific gravity of their beer . 
They had hardly entered the cellar when Mrs. Hall found she had forgotten to bring down a bottle of sarsaparilla from their joint-room . 
As she was the expert and principal operator in this affair , Hall very properly went upstairs for it . 
On the landing he was surprised to see that the stranger 's door was ajar . 
He went on into his own room and found the bottle as he had been directed . 
But returning with the bottle , he noticed that the bolts of the front door had been shot back , that the door was in fact simply on the latch . 
