He wondered what his antagonist was doing . 
He started . 
There was a smash from below . 
He hesitated and went downstairs again . 
Suddenly the house resounded with heavy blows and the splintering of wood . 
He heard a smash and the destructive clang of the iron fastenings of the shutters . 
He turned the key and opened the kitchen door . 
As he did so , the shutters , split and splintering , came flying inward . 
He stood aghast . 
The window frame , save for one crossbar , was still intact , but only little teeth of glass remained in the frame . 
The shutters had been driven in with an axe , and now the axe was descending in sweeping blows upon the window frame and the iron bars defending it . 
Then suddenly it leapt aside and vanished . 
He saw the revolver lying on the path outside , and then the little weapon sprang into the air . 
He dodged back . 
The revolver cracked just too late , and a splinter from the edge of the closing door flashed over his head . 
He slammed and locked the door , and as he stood outside he heard Griffin shouting and laughing . 
Then the blows of the axe with its splitting and smashing consequences , were resumed . 
Kemp stood in the passage trying to think . 
In a moment the Invisible Man would be in the kitchen . 
This door would not keep him a moment , and then -- A ringing came at the front door again . 
It would be the policemen . 
He ran into the hall , put up the chain , and drew the bolts . 
He made the girl speak before he dropped the chain , and the three people blundered into the house in a heap , and Kemp slammed the door again . 
`` The Invisible Man ! '' 
said Kemp . 
`` He has a revolver , with two shots -- left . 
He 's killed Adye . 
Shot him anyhow . 
Did n't you see him on the lawn ? 
He 's lying there . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said one of the policemen . 
`` Adye , '' said Kemp . 
`` We came in the back way , '' said the girl . 
`` What 's that smashing ? '' 
asked one of the policemen . 
`` He 's in the kitchen -- or will be . 
He has found an axe -- '' Suddenly the house was full of the Invisible Man 's resounding blows on the kitchen door . 
The girl stared towards the kitchen , shuddered , and retreated into the dining-room . 
Kemp tried to explain in broken sentences . 
They heard the kitchen door give . 
`` This way , '' said Kemp , starting into activity , and bundled the policemen into the dining-room doorway . 
`` Poker , '' said Kemp , and rushed to the fender . 
He handed the poker he had carried to the policeman and the dining-room one to the other . 
He suddenly flung himself backward . 
`` Whup ! '' 
said one policeman , ducked , and caught the axe on his poker . 
The pistol snapped its penultimate shot and ripped a valuable Sidney Cooper . 
The second policeman brought his poker down on the little weapon , as one might knock down a wasp , and sent it rattling to the floor . 
At the first clash the girl screamed , stood screaming for a moment by the fireplace , and then ran to open the shutters -- possibly with an idea of escaping by the shattered window . 
The axe receded into the passage , and fell to a position about two feet from the ground . 
They could hear the Invisible Man breathing . 
`` Stand away , you two , '' he said . 
`` I want that man Kemp . '' 
`` We want you , '' said the first policeman , making a quick step forward and wiping with his poker at the Voice . 
The Invisible Man must have started back , and he blundered into the umbrella stand . 
Then , as the policeman staggered with the swing of the blow he had aimed , the Invisible Man countered with the axe , the helmet crumpled like paper , and the blow sent the man spinning to the floor at the head of the kitchen stairs . 
But the second policeman , aiming behind the axe with his poker , hit something soft that snapped . 
There was a sharp exclamation of pain and then the axe fell to the ground . 
The policeman wiped again at vacancy and hit nothing ; he put his foot on the axe , and struck again . 
Then he stood , poker clubbed , listening intent for the slightest movement . 
He heard the dining-room window open , and a quick rush of feet within . 
His companion rolled over and sat up , with the blood running down between his eye and ear . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
asked the man on the floor . 
`` Do n't know . 
I 've hit him . 
He 's standing somewhere in the hall . 
Unless he 's slipped past you . 
Doctor Kemp -- sir . '' 
Pause . 
`` Doctor Kemp , '' cried the policeman again . 
The second policeman began struggling to his feet . 
He stood up . 
Suddenly the faint pad of bare feet on the kitchen stairs could be heard . 
`` Yap ! '' 
cried the first policeman , and incontinently flung his poker . 
It smashed a little gas bracket . 
He made as if he would pursue the Invisible Man downstairs . 
Then he throught better of it and stepped into the dining-room . 
`` Doctor Kemp -- '' he began , and stopped short . 
`` Doctor Kemp 's a hero , '' he said , as his companion looked over his shoulder . 
The dining-room window was wide open , and neither housemaid nor Kemp was to be seen . 
The second policeman 's opinion of Kemp was terse and vivid . 
THE HUNTER HUNTED Mr. Heelas , Mr. Kemp 's nearest neighbour among the villa holders , was asleep in his summer house when the siege of Kemp 's house began . 
Mr. Heelas was one of the sturdy minority who refused to believe `` in all this nonsense '' about an Invisible Man . 
His wife , however , as he was subsequently to be reminded , did . 
He insisted upon walking about his garden just as if nothing was the matter , and he went to sleep in the afternoon in accordance with the custom of years . 
He slept through the smashing of the windows , and then woke up suddenly with a curious persuasion of something wrong . 
He looked across at Kemp 's house , rubbed his eyes and looked again . 
Then he put his feet to the ground , and sat listening . 
He said he was damned , but still the strange thing was visible . 
The house looked as though it had been deserted for weeks -- after a violent riot . 
Every window was broken , and every window , save those of the belvedere study , was blinded by the internal shutters . 
`` I could have sworn it was all right '' -- he looked at his watch -- `` twenty minutes ago . '' 
He became aware of a measured concussion and the clash of glass , far away in the distance . 
And then , as he sat open-mouthed , came a still more wonderful thing . 
The shutters of the drawing-room window were flung open violently , and the housemaid in her outdoor hat and garments , appeared struggling in a frantic manner to throw up the sash . 
Suddenly a man appeared beside her , helping her -- Dr. Kemp ! 
In another moment the window was open , and the housemaid was struggling out ; she pitched forward and vanished among the shrubs . 
