Out of her hearing there was a view largely entertained that he was a criminal trying to escape from justice by wrapping himself up so as to conceal himself altogether from the eye of the police . 
This idea sprang from the brain of Mr. Teddy Henfrey . 
No crime of any magnitude dating from the middle or end of February was known to have occurred . 
Elaborated in the imagination of Mr. Gould , the probationary assistant in the National School , this theory took the form that the stranger was an Anarchist in disguise , preparing explosives , and he resolved to undertake such detective operations as his time permitted . 
These consisted for the most part in looking very hard at the stranger whenever they met , or in asking people who had never seen the stranger , leading questions about him . 
But he detected nothing . 
Another school of opinion followed Mr. Fearenside , and either accepted the piebald view or some modification of it ; as , for instance , Silas Durgan , who was heard to assert that `` if he choses to show enself at fairs he 'd make his fortune in no time , '' and being a bit of a theologian , compared the stranger to the man with the one talent . 
Yet another view explained the entire matter by regarding the stranger as a harmless lunatic . 
That had the advantage of accounting for everything straight away . 
Between these main groups there were waverers and compromisers . 
Sussex folk have few superstitions , and it was only after the events of early April that the thought of the supernatural was first whispered in the village . 
Even then it was only credited among the women folk . 
But whatever they thought of him , people in Iping , on the whole , agreed in disliking him . 
His irritability , though it might have been comprehensible to an urban brain-worker , was an amazing thing to these quiet Sussex villagers . 
The frantic gesticulations they surprised now and then , the headlong pace after nightfall that swept him upon them round quiet corners , the inhuman bludgeoning of all tentative advances of curiosity , the taste for twilight that led to the closing of doors , the pulling down of blinds , the extinction of candles and lamps -- who could agree with such goings on ? 
They drew aside as he passed down the village , and when he had gone by , young humourists would up with coat-collars and down with hat-brims , and go pacing nervously after him in imitation of his occult bearing . 
There was a song popular at that time called `` The Bogey Man '' . 
Miss Statchell sang it at the schoolroom concert -LRB- in aid of the church lamps -RRB- , and thereafter whenever one or two of the villagers were gathered together and the stranger appeared , a bar or so of this tune , more or less sharp or flat , was whistled in the midst of them . 
Also belated little children would call `` Bogey Man ! '' 
after him , and make off tremulously elated . 
Cuss , the general practitioner , was devoured by curiosity . 
The bandages excited his professional interest , the report of the thousand and one bottles aroused his jealous regard . 
All through April and May he coveted an opportunity of talking to the stranger , and at last , towards Whitsuntide , he could stand it no longer , but hit upon the subscription-list for a village nurse as an excuse . 
He was surprised to find that Mr. Hall did not know his guest 's name . 
`` He give a name , '' said Mrs. Hall -- an assertion which was quite unfounded -- `` but I did n't rightly hear it . '' 
She thought it seemed so silly not to know the man 's name . 
Cuss rapped at the parlour door and entered . 
There was a fairly audible imprecation from within . 
`` Pardon my intrusion , '' said Cuss , and then the door closed and cut Mrs. Hall off from the rest of the conversation . 
She could hear the murmur of voices for the next ten minutes , then a cry of surprise , a stirring of feet , a chair flung aside , a bark of laughter , quick steps to the door , and Cuss appeared , his face white , his eyes staring over his shoulder . 
He left the door open behind him , and without looking at her strode across the hall and went down the steps , and she heard his feet hurrying along the road . 
He carried his hat in his hand . 
She stood behind the door , looking at the open door of the parlour . 
Then she heard the stranger laughing quietly , and then his footsteps came across the room . 
She could not see his face where she stood . 
The parlour door slammed , and the place was silent again . 
Cuss went straight up the village to Bunting the vicar . 
`` Am I mad ? '' 
Cuss began abruptly , as he entered the shabby little study . 
`` Do I look like an insane person ? '' 
`` What 's happened ? '' 
said the vicar , putting the ammonite on the loose sheets of his forth-coming sermon . 
`` That chap at the inn -- '' `` Well ? '' 
`` Give me something to drink , '' said Cuss , and he sat down . 
When his nerves had been steadied by a glass of cheap sherry -- the only drink the good vicar had available -- he told him of the interview he had just had . 
`` Went in , '' he gasped , `` and began to demand a subscription for that Nurse Fund . 
He 'd stuck his hands in his pockets as I came in , and he sat down lumpily in his chair . 
Sniffed . 
I told him I 'd heard he took an interest in scientific things . 
He said yes . 
Sniffed again . 
Kept on sniffing all the time ; evidently recently caught an infernal cold . 
No wonder , wrapped up like that ! 
I developed the nurse idea , and all the while kept my eyes open . 
Bottles -- chemicals -- everywhere . 
Balance , test-tubes in stands , and a smell of -- evening primrose . 
Would he subscribe ? 
Said he 'd consider it . 
Asked him , point-blank , was he researching . 
Said he was . 
A long research ? 
Got quite cross . ' 
A damnable long research , ' said he , blowing the cork out , so to speak . 
` Oh , ' said I. And out came the grievance . 
The man was just on the boil , and my question boiled him over . 
He had been given a prescription , most valuable prescription -- what for he would n't say . 
Was it medical ? 
` Damn you ! 
What are you fishing after ? ' 
I apologised . 
Dignified sniff and cough . 
He resumed . 
He 'd read it . 
Five ingredients . 
Put it down ; turned his head . 
Draught of air from window lifted the paper . 
Swish , rustle . 
He was working in a room with an open fireplace , he said . 
Saw a flicker , and there was the prescription burning and lifting chimneyward . 
Rushed towards it just as it whisked up the chimney . 
So ! 
Just at that point , to illustrate his story , out came his arm . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` No hand -- just an empty sleeve . 
Lord ! 
I thought , _ that 's _ a deformity ! 
Got a cork arm , I suppose , and has taken it off . 
Then , I thought , there 's something odd in that . 
What the devil keeps that sleeve up and open , if there 's nothing in it ? 
There was nothing in it , I tell you . 
Nothing down it , right down to the joint . 
I could see right down it to the elbow , and there was a glimmer of light shining through a tear of the cloth . 
` Good God ! ' 
I said . 
Then he stopped . 
Stared at me with those black goggles of his , and then at his sleeve . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That 's all . 
He never said a word ; just glared , and put his sleeve back in his pocket quickly . ' 
I was saying , ' said he , ` that there was the prescription burning , was n't I ? ' 
