This looked out upon the street , two lace curtains brown with dirt guarding the window . 
I went and peered out through their interstices . 
Outside the day was bright -- by contrast with the brown shadows of the dismal house in which I found myself , dazzlingly bright . 
A brisk traffic was going by , fruit carts , a hansom , a four-wheeler with a pile of boxes , a fishmonger 's cart . 
I turned with spots of colour swimming before my eyes to the shadowy fixtures behind me . 
My excitement was giving place to a clear apprehension of my position again . 
The room was full of a faint scent of benzoline , used , I suppose , in cleaning the garments . 
`` I began a systematic search of the place . 
I should judge the hunchback had been alone in the house for some time . 
He was a curious person . 
Everything that could possibly be of service to me I collected in the clothes storeroom , and then I made a deliberate selection . 
I found a handbag I thought a suitable possession , and some powder , rouge , and sticking-plaster . 
`` I had thought of painting and powdering my face and all that there was to show of me , in order to render myself visible , but the disadvantage of this lay in the fact that I should require turpentine and other appliances and a considerable amount of time before I could vanish again . 
Finally I chose a mask of the better type , slightly grotesque but not more so than many human beings , dark glasses , greyish whiskers , and a wig . 
I could find no underclothing , but that I could buy subsequently , and for the time I swathed myself in calico dominoes and some white cashmere scarfs . 
I could find no socks , but the hunchback 's boots were rather a loose fit and sufficed . 
In a desk in the shop were three sovereigns and about thirty shillings ' worth of silver , and in a locked cupboard I burst in the inner room were eight pounds in gold . 
I could go forth into the world again , equipped . 
`` Then came a curious hesitation . 
Was my appearance really credible ? 
I tried myself with a little bedroom looking-glass , inspecting myself from every point of view to discover any forgotten chink , but it all seemed sound . 
I was grotesque to the theatrical pitch , a stage miser , but I was certainly not a physical impossibility . 
Gathering confidence , I took my looking-glass down into the shop , pulled down the shop blinds , and surveyed myself from every point of view with the help of the cheval glass in the corner . 
`` I spent some minutes screwing up my courage and then unlocked the shop door and marched out into the street , leaving the little man to get out of his sheet again when he liked . 
In five minutes a dozen turnings intervened between me and the costumier 's shop . 
No one appeared to notice me very pointedly . 
My last difficulty seemed overcome . '' 
He stopped again . 
`` And you troubled no more about the hunchback ? '' 
said Kemp . 
`` No , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` Nor have I heard what became of him . 
I suppose he untied himself or kicked himself out . 
The knots were pretty tight . '' 
He became silent and went to the window and stared out . 
`` What happened when you went out into the Strand ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
-- disillusionment again . 
I thought my troubles were over . 
Practically I thought I had impunity to do whatever I chose , everything -- save to give away my secret . 
So I thought . 
Whatever I did , whatever the consequences might be , was nothing to me . 
I had merely to fling aside my garments and vanish . 
No person could hold me . 
I could take my money where I found it . 
I decided to treat myself to a sumptuous feast , and then put up at a good hotel , and accumulate a new outfit of property . 
I felt amazingly confident ; it 's not particularly pleasant recalling that I was an ass . 
I went into a place and was already ordering lunch , when it occurred to me that I could not eat unless I exposed my invisible face . 
I finished ordering the lunch , told the man I should be back in ten minutes , and went out exasperated . 
I do n't know if you have ever been disappointed in your appetite . '' 
`` Not quite so badly , '' said Kemp , `` but I can imagine it . '' 
`` I could have smashed the silly devils . 
At last , faint with the desire for tasteful food , I went into another place and demanded a private room . ' 
I am disfigured , ' I said . 
` Badly . ' 
They looked at me curiously , but of course it was not their affair -- and so at last I got my lunch . 
It was not particularly well served , but it sufficed ; and when I had had it , I sat over a cigar , trying to plan my line of action . 
And outside a snowstorm was beginning . 
`` The more I thought it over , Kemp , the more I realised what a helpless absurdity an Invisible Man was -- in a cold and dirty climate and a crowded civilised city . 
Before I made this mad experiment I had dreamt of a thousand advantages . 
That afternoon it seemed all disappointment . 
I went over the heads of the things a man reckons desirable . 
No doubt invisibility made it possible to get them , but it made it impossible to enjoy them when they are got . 
Ambition -- what is the good of pride of place when you can not appear there ? 
What is the good of the love of woman when her name must needs be Delilah ? 
I have no taste for politics , for the blackguardisms of fame , for philanthropy , for sport . 
What was I to do ? 
And for this I had become a wrapped-up mystery , a swathed and bandaged caricature of a man ! '' 
He paused , and his attitude suggested a roving glance at the window . 
`` But how did you get to Iping ? '' 
said Kemp , anxious to keep his guest busy talking . 
`` I went there to work . 
I had one hope . 
It was a half idea ! 
I have it still . 
It is a full blown idea now . 
A way of getting back ! 
Of restoring what I have done . 
When I choose . 
When I have done all I mean to do invisibly . 
And that is what I chiefly want to talk to you about now . '' 
`` You went straight to Iping ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I had simply to get my three volumes of memoranda and my cheque-book , my luggage and underclothing , order a quantity of chemicals to work out this idea of mine -- I will show you the calculations as soon as I get my books -- and then I started . 
Jove ! 
I remember the snowstorm now , and the accursed bother it was to keep the snow from damping my pasteboard nose . '' 
`` At the end , '' said Kemp , `` the day before yesterday , when they found you out , you rather -- to judge by the papers -- '' `` I did . 
Rather . 
Did I kill that fool of a constable ? '' 
`` No , '' said Kemp . 
`` He 's expected to recover . '' 
`` That 's his luck , then . 
I clean lost my temper , the fools ! 
Why could n't they leave me alone ? 
And that grocer lout ? '' 
`` There are no deaths expected , '' said Kemp . 
`` I do n't know about that tramp of mine , '' said the Invisible Man , with an unpleasant laugh . 
`` By Heaven , Kemp , you do n't know what rage is ! 
... To have worked for years , to have planned and plotted , and then to get some fumbling purblind idiot messing across your course ! 
... Every conceivable sort of silly creature that has ever been created has been sent to cross me . 
