`` It was a queer little room , poorly furnished and with a number of big masks in the corner . 
On the table was his belated breakfast , and it was a confoundedly exasperating thing for me , Kemp , to have to sniff his coffee and stand watching while he came in and resumed his meal . 
And his table manners were irritating . 
Three doors opened into the little room , one going upstairs and one down , but they were all shut . 
I could not get out of the room while he was there ; I could scarcely move because of his alertness , and there was a draught down my back . 
Twice I strangled a sneeze just in time . 
`` The spectacular quality of my sensations was curious and novel , but for all that I was heartily tired and angry long before he had done his eating . 
But at last he made an end and putting his beggarly crockery on the black tin tray upon which he had had his teapot , and gathering all the crumbs up on the mustard stained cloth , he took the whole lot of things after him . 
His burden prevented his shutting the door behind him -- as he would have done ; I never saw such a man for shutting doors -- and I followed him into a very dirty underground kitchen and scullery . 
I had the pleasure of seeing him begin to wash up , and then , finding no good in keeping down there , and the brick floor being cold on my feet , I returned upstairs and sat in his chair by the fire . 
It was burning low , and scarcely thinking , I put on a little coal . 
The noise of this brought him up at once , and he stood aglare . 
He peered about the room and was within an ace of touching me . 
Even after that examination , he scarcely seemed satisfied . 
He stopped in the doorway and took a final inspection before he went down . 
`` I waited in the little parlour for an age , and at last he came up and opened the upstairs door . 
I just managed to get by him . 
`` On the staircase he stopped suddenly , so that I very nearly blundered into him . 
He stood looking back right into my face and listening . ' 
I could have sworn , ' he said . 
His long hairy hand pulled at his lower lip . 
His eye went up and down the staircase . 
Then he grunted and went on up again . 
`` His hand was on the handle of a door , and then he stopped again with the same puzzled anger on his face . 
He was becoming aware of the faint sounds of my movements about him . 
The man must have had diabolically acute hearing . 
He suddenly flashed into rage . 
` If there 's anyone in this house -- ' he cried with an oath , and left the threat unfinished . 
He put his hand in his pocket , failed to find what he wanted , and rushing past me went blundering noisily and pugnaciously downstairs . 
But I did not follow him . 
I sat on the head of the staircase until his return . 
`` Presently he came up again , still muttering . 
He opened the door of the room , and before I could enter , slammed it in my face . 
`` I resolved to explore the house , and spent some time in doing so as noiselessly as possible . 
The house was very old and tumble-down , damp so that the paper in the attics was peeling from the walls , and rat infested . 
Some of the door handles were stiff and I was afraid to turn them . 
Several rooms I did inspect were unfurnished , and others were littered with theatrical lumber , bought second-hand , I judged , from its appearance . 
In one room next to his I found a lot of old clothes . 
I began routing among these , and in my eagerness forgot again the evident sharpness of his ears . 
I heard a stealthy footstep and , looking up just in time , saw him peering in at the tumbled heap and holding an old-fashioned revolver in his hand . 
I stood perfectly still while he stared about open-mouthed and suspicious . 
` It must have been her , ' he said slowly . 
` Damn her ! ' 
`` He shut the door quietly , and immediately I heard the key turn in the lock . 
Then his footsteps retreated . 
I realised abruptly that I was locked in . 
For a minute I did not know what to do . 
I walked from door to window and back , and stood perplexed . 
A gust of anger came upon me . 
But I decided to inspect the clothes before I did anything further , and my first attempt brought down a pile from an upper shelf . 
This brought him back , more sinister than ever . 
That time he actually touched me , jumped back with amazement and stood astonished in the middle of the room . 
`` Presently he calmed a little . 
` Rats , ' he said in an undertone , fingers on lips . 
He was evidently a little scared . 
I edged quietly out of the room , but a plank creaked . 
Then the infernal little brute started going all over the house , revolver in hand and locking door after door and pocketing the keys . 
When I realised what he was up to I had a fit of rage -- I could hardly control myself sufficiently to watch my opportunity . 
By this time I knew he was alone in the house , and so I made no more ado , but knocked him on the head . '' 
`` Knocked him on the head ? '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Yes -- stunned him -- as he was going downstairs . 
Hit him from behind with a stool that stood on the landing . 
He went downstairs like a bag of old boots . '' 
`` But -- I say ! 
The common conventions of humanity -- '' `` Are all very well for common people . 
But the point was , Kemp , that I had to get out of that house in a disguise without his seeing me . 
I could n't think of any other way of doing it . 
And then I gagged him with a Louis Quatorze vest and tied him up in a sheet . '' 
`` Tied him up in a sheet ! '' 
`` Made a sort of bag of it . 
It was rather a good idea to keep the idiot scared and quiet , and a devilish hard thing to get out of -- head away from the string . 
My dear Kemp , it 's no good your sitting glaring as though I was a murderer . 
It had to be done . 
He had his revolver . 
If once he saw me he would be able to describe me -- '' `` But still , '' said Kemp , `` in England -- to-day . 
And the man was in his own house , and you were -- well , robbing . '' 
`` Robbing ! 
Confound it ! 
You 'll call me a thief next ! 
Surely , Kemp , you 're not fool enough to dance on the old strings . 
Ca n't you see my position ? '' 
`` And his too , '' said Kemp . 
The Invisible Man stood up sharply . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
Kemp 's face grew a trifle hard . 
He was about to speak and checked himself . 
`` I suppose , after all , '' he said with a sudden change of manner , `` the thing had to be done . 
You were in a fix . 
But still -- '' `` Of course I was in a fix -- an infernal fix . 
And he made me wild too -- hunting me about the house , fooling about with his revolver , locking and unlocking doors . 
He was simply exasperating . 
You do n't blame me , do you ? 
You do n't blame me ? '' 
`` I never blame anyone , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's quite out of fashion . 
What did you do next ? '' 
`` I was hungry . 
Downstairs I found a loaf and some rank cheese -- more than sufficient to satisfy my hunger . 
I took some brandy and water , and then went up past my impromptu bag -- he was lying quite still -- to the room containing the old clothes . 
