said Kemp . 
`` I did n't mean to interrupt . '' 
`` It 's very probably been killed , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` It was alive four days after , I know , and down a grating in Great Tichfield Street ; because I saw a crowd round the place , trying to see whence the miaowing came . '' 
He was silent for the best part of a minute . 
Then he resumed abruptly : `` I remember that morning before the change very vividly . 
I must have gone up Great Portland Street . 
I remember the barracks in Albany Street , and the horse soldiers coming out , and at last I found the summit of Primrose Hill . 
It was a sunny day in January -- one of those sunny , frosty days that came before the snow this year . 
My weary brain tried to formulate the position , to plot out a plan of action . 
`` I was surprised to find , now that my prize was within my grasp , how inconclusive its attainment seemed . 
As a matter of fact I was worked out ; the intense stress of nearly four years ' continuous work left me incapable of any strength of feeling . 
I was apathetic , and I tried in vain to recover the enthusiasm of my first inquiries , the passion of discovery that had enabled me to compass even the downfall of my father 's grey hairs . 
Nothing seemed to matter . 
I saw pretty clearly this was a transient mood , due to overwork and want of sleep , and that either by drugs or rest it would be possible to recover my energies . 
`` All I could think clearly was that the thing had to be carried through ; the fixed idea still ruled me . 
And soon , for the money I had was almost exhausted . 
I looked about me at the hillside , with children playing and girls watching them , and tried to think of all the fantastic advantages an invisible man would have in the world . 
After a time I crawled home , took some food and a strong dose of strychnine , and went to sleep in my clothes on my unmade bed . 
Strychnine is a grand tonic , Kemp , to take the flabbiness out of a man . '' 
`` It 's the devil , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's the palaeolithic in a bottle . '' 
`` I awoke vastly invigorated and rather irritable . 
You know ? '' 
`` I know the stuff . '' 
`` And there was someone rapping at the door . 
It was my landlord with threats and inquiries , an old Polish Jew in a long grey coat and greasy slippers . 
I had been tormenting a cat in the night , he was sure -- the old woman 's tongue had been busy . 
He insisted on knowing all about it . 
The laws in this country against vivisection were very severe -- he might be liable . 
I denied the cat . 
Then the vibration of the little gas engine could be felt all over the house , he said . 
That was true , certainly . 
He edged round me into the room , peering about over his German-silver spectacles , and a sudden dread came into my mind that he might carry away something of my secret . 
I tried to keep between him and the concentrating apparatus I had arranged , and that only made him more curious . 
What was I doing ? 
Why was I always alone and secretive ? 
Was it legal ? 
Was it dangerous ? 
I paid nothing but the usual rent . 
His had always been a most respectable house -- in a disreputable neighbourhood . 
Suddenly my temper gave way . 
I told him to get out . 
He began to protest , to jabber of his right of entry . 
In a moment I had him by the collar ; something ripped , and he went spinning out into his own passage . 
I slammed and locked the door and sat down quivering . 
`` He made a fuss outside , which I disregarded , and after a time he went away . 
`` But this brought matters to a crisis . 
I did not know what he would do , nor even what he had the power to do . 
To move to fresh apartments would have meant delay ; altogether I had barely twenty pounds left in the world , for the most part in a bank -- and I could not afford that . 
Vanish ! 
It was irresistible . 
Then there would be an inquiry , the sacking of my room . 
`` At the thought of the possibility of my work being exposed or interrupted at its very climax , I became very angry and active . 
I hurried out with my three books of notes , my cheque-book -- the tramp has them now -- and directed them from the nearest Post Office to a house of call for letters and parcels in Great Portland Street . 
I tried to go out noiselessly . 
Coming in , I found my landlord going quietly upstairs ; he had heard the door close , I suppose . 
You would have laughed to see him jump aside on the landing as came tearing after him . 
He glared at me as I went by him , and I made the house quiver with the slamming of my door . 
I heard him come shuffling up to my floor , hesitate , and go down . 
I set to work upon my preparations forthwith . 
`` It was all done that evening and night . 
While I was still sitting under the sickly , drowsy influence of the drugs that decolourise blood , there came a repeated knocking at the door . 
It ceased , footsteps went away and returned , and the knocking was resumed . 
There was an attempt to push something under the door -- a blue paper . 
Then in a fit of irritation I rose and went and flung the door wide open . 
` Now then ? ' 
said I. `` It was my landlord , with a notice of ejectment or something . 
He held it out to me , saw something odd about my hands , I expect , and lifted his eyes to my face . 
`` For a moment he gaped . 
Then he gave a sort of inarticulate cry , dropped candle and writ together , and went blundering down the dark passage to the stairs . 
I shut the door , locked it , and went to the looking-glass . 
Then I understood his terror ... . 
My face was white -- like white stone . 
`` But it was all horrible . 
I had not expected the suffering . 
A night of racking anguish , sickness and fainting . 
I set my teeth , though my skin was presently afire , all my body afire ; but I lay there like grim death . 
I understood now how it was the cat had howled until I chloroformed it . 
Lucky it was I lived alone and untended in my room . 
There were times when I sobbed and groaned and talked . 
But I stuck to it ... . 
I became insensible and woke languid in the darkness . 
`` The pain had passed . 
I thought I was killing myself and I did not care . 
I shall never forget that dawn , and the strange horror of seeing that my hands had become as clouded glass , and watching them grow clearer and thinner as the day went by , until at last I could see the sickly disorder of my room through them , though I closed my transparent eyelids . 
My limbs became glassy , the bones and arteries faded , vanished , and the little white nerves went last . 
I gritted my teeth and stayed there to the end . 
At last only the dead tips of the fingernails remained , pallid and white , and the brown stain of some acid upon my fingers . 
`` I struggled up . 
At first I was as incapable as a swathed infant -- stepping with limbs I could not see . 
I was weak and very hungry . 
I went and stared at nothing in my shaving-glass , at nothing save where an attenuated pigment still remained behind the retina of my eyes , fainter than mist . 
I had to hang on to the table and press my forehead against the glass . 
`` It was only by a frantic effort of will that I dragged myself back to the apparatus and completed the process . 
`` I slept during the forenoon , pulling the sheet over my eyes to shut out the light , and about midday I was awakened again by a knocking . 
My strength had returned . 
I sat up and listened and heard a whispering . 
I sprang to my feet and as noiselessly as possible began to detach the connections of my apparatus , and to distribute it about the room , so as to destroy the suggestions of its arrangement . 
Presently the knocking was renewed and voices called , first my landlord 's , and then two others . 
