... Mankind reduced to mechanics ... . 
No useless operations that would not produce immediate results ... . 
And the people who heralded this awful idea were the very philosophers and idealists who had once given contemplation and reflection the first place in their existence ! 
... Hartrott again harked back to the inferiority of their racial enemies . 
In order to combat successfully , it required self-assurance , an unquenchable confidence in the superiority of their own powers . 
`` At this very hour in Berlin , everyone is accepting war , everyone is believing that victory is sure , while HERE ! 
... I do not say that the French are afraid ; they have a brave past that galvanizes them at certain times -- but they are so depressed that it is easy to guess that they will make almost any sacrifices in order to evade what is coming upon them . 
The people first will shout with enthusiasm , as it always cheers that which carries it to perdition . 
The upper classes have no faith in the future ; they are keeping quiet , but the presentiment of disaster may easily be conjectured . 
Yesterday I was talking with your father . 
He is French , and he is rich . 
He was indignant against the government of his country for involving the nation in the European conflict in order to defend a distant and uninteresting people . 
He complains of the exalted patriots who have opened the abyss between Germany and France , preventing a reconciliation . 
He says that Alsace and Lorraine are not worth what a war would cost in men and money ... . 
He recognizes our greatness and is convinced that we have progressed so rapidly that the other countries can not come up to us ... . 
And as your father thinks , so do many others -- all those who are wrapped in creature comfort , and fear to lose it . 
Believe me , a country that hesitates and fears war is conquered before the first battle . '' 
Julio evinced a certain disquietude , as though he would like to cut short the conversation . 
`` Just leave my father out of it ! 
He speaks that way to-day because war is not yet an accomplished fact , and he has to contradict and vent his indignation on whoever comes near him . 
To-morrow he will say just the opposite ... . 
My father is a Latin . '' 
The professor looked at his watch . 
He must go ; there were still many things which he had to do before going to the station . 
The Germans living in Paris had fled in great bands as though a secret order had been circulating among them . 
That afternoon the last of those who had been living ostensibly in the Capital would depart . 
`` I have come to see you because of our family interest , because it was my duty to give you fair warning . 
You are a foreigner , and nothing holds you here . 
If you are desirous of witnessing a great historic event , remain -- but it will be better for you to go . 
The war is going to be ruthless , very ruthless , and if Paris attempts resistance , as formerly , we shall see terrible things . 
Modes of offense have greatly changed . '' 
Desnoyers made a gesture of indifference . 
`` The same as your father , '' observed the professor . 
`` Last night he and all your family responded in the same way . 
Even my mother prefers to remain with her sister , saying that the Germans are very good , very civilized and there is nothing to apprehend in their triumph . '' 
This good opinion seemed to be troubling the Doctor . 
`` They do n't understand what modern warfare means . 
They ignore the fact that our generals have studied the art of overcoming the enemy and they will apply it mercilessly . 
Ruthlessness is the only means , since it perturbs the intelligence of the enemy , paralyzes his action and pulverizes his resistance . 
The more ferocious the war , the more quickly it is concluded . 
To punish with cruelty is to proceed humanely . 
Therefore , Germany is going to be cruel with a cruelty hitherto unseen , in order that the conflict may not be prolonged . '' 
He had risen and was standing , cane and straw hat in hand . 
Argensola was looking at him with frank hostility . 
The professor , obliged to pass near him , did so with a stiff and disdainful nod . 
Then he started toward the door , accompanied by his cousin . 
The farewell was brief . 
`` I repeat my counsel . 
If you do not like danger , go ! 
It may be that I am mistaken , and that this nation , convinced of the uselessness of defense , may give itself up voluntarily ... . 
At any rate , we shall soon see . 
I shall take great pleasure in returning to Paris when the flag of the Empire is floating over the Eiffel Tower , a mere matter of three or four weeks , certainly by the beginning of September . '' 
France was going to disappear from the map . 
To the Doctor , her death was a foregone conclusion . 
`` Paris will remain , '' he admitted benevolently , `` the French will remain , because a nation is not easily suppressed ; but they will not retain their former place . 
We shall govern the world ; they will continue to occupy themselves in inventing fashions , in making life agreeable for visiting foreigners ; and in the intellectual world , we shall encourage them to educate good actresses , to produce entertaining novels and to write witty comedies ... . 
Nothing more . '' 
Desnoyers laughed as he shook his cousin 's hand , pretending to take his words as a paradox . 
`` I mean it , '' insisted Hartrott . 
`` The last hour of the French Republic as an important nation has sounded . 
I have studied it at close range , and it deserves no better fate . 
License and lack of confidence above -- sterile enthusiasm below . '' 
Upon turning his head , he again caught Argensola 's malicious smile . 
`` We know all about that kind of study , '' he added aggressively . 
`` We are accustomed to examine the nations of the past , to dissect them fibre by fibre , so that we recognize at a glance the psychology of the living . '' 
The Bohemian fancied that he saw a surgeon talking self-sufficiently about the mysteries of the will before a corpse . 
What did this pedantic interpreter of dead documents know about life ? 
... When the door closed , he approached his friend who was returning somewhat dismayed . 
Argensola no longer considered Doctor Julius von Hartrott crazy . 
`` What a brute ! '' 
he exclaimed , throwing up his hands . 
`` And to think that they are at large , these originators of gloomy errors ! 
... Who would ever believe that they belong to the same land that produced Kant , the pacifist , the serene Goethe and Beethoven ! 
... To think that for so many years , we have believed that they were forming a nation of dreamers and philosophers occupied in working disinterestedly for all mankind ! 
... '' The sentence of a German geographer recurred to him : `` The German is bicephalous ; with one head he dreams and poetizes while with the other he thinks and executes . '' 
Desnoyers was now beginning to feel depressed at the certainty of war . 
This professor seemed to him even worse than the Herr Counsellor and the other Germans that he had met on the steamer . 
His distress was not only because of his selfish thought as to how the catastrophe was going to affect his plans with Marguerite . 
He was suddenly discovering that in this hour of uncertainty he loved France . 
He recognized it as his father 's native land and the scene of the great Revolution ... . 
Although he had never mixed in political campaigns , he was a republican at heart , and had often ridiculed certain of his friends who adored kings and emperors , thinking it a great sign of distinction . 
Argensola tried to cheer him up . 
`` Who knows ? 
... This is a country of surprises . 
One must see the Frenchman when he tries to remedy his want of foresight . 
Let that barbarian of a cousin of yours say what he will -- there is order , there is enthusiasm ... . 
Worse off than we were those who lived in the days before Valmy . 
Entirely disorganized , their only defense battalions of laborers and countrymen handling a gun for the first time ... . 
But , nevertheless , the Europe of the old monarchies could not for twenty years free themselves from these improvised warriors ! '' 
The two friends now lived a feverish life , considerably accelerated by the rapidity with which events succeeded each other . 
Every hour brought forth an astonishing bit of news -- generally false -- which changed opinions very suddenly . 
As soon as the danger of war seemed arrested , the report would spread that mobilization was going to be ordered within a few minutes . 
Within each twenty-four hours were compressed the disquietude , anxiety and nervous waste of a normal year . 
And that which was aggravating the situation still more was the uncertainty , the expectation of the event , feared but still invisible , the distress on account of a danger continually threatening but never arriving . 
History in the making was like a stream overflowing its banks , events overlapping each other like the waves of an inundation . 
Austria was declaring war with Servia while the diplomats of the great powers were continuing their efforts to stem the tide . 
The electric web girdling the planet was vibrating incessantly in the depths of the ocean and on the peaks of the continents , transmitting alternate hopes and fears . 
Russia was mobilizing a part of its army . 
Germany , with its troops in readiness under the pretext of manoeuvres , was decreeing the state of `` threatened war . '' 
The Austrians , regardless of the efforts of diplomacy , were beginning the bombardment of Belgrade . 
William II , fearing that the intervention of the Powers might settle the differences between the Czar and the Emperor of Austria , was forcing the course of events by declaring war upon Russia . 
Then Germany began isolating herself , cutting off railroad and telegraphic communications in order to shroud in mystery her invading forces . 
France was watching this avalanche of events , temperate in its words and enthusiasm . 
A cool and grave resolution was noticeable everywhere . 
Two generations had come into the world , informed as soon as they reached a reasonable age , that some day there would undoubtedly be war . 
Nobody wanted it ; the adversary imposed it ... . 
But all were accepting it with the firm intention of fulfilling their duty . 
During the daytime Paris was very quiet , concentrating the mind on the work in hand . 
Only a few groups of exalted patriots , following the tricolored flag , were passing through the place de la Concorde , in order to salute the statue of Strasbourg . 
The people were accosting each other in a friendly way in the streets . 
Everybody seemed to know everybody else , although they might not have met before . 
Eye attracted eye , and smiles appeared to broaden mutually with the sympathy of a common interest . 
The women were sad but speaking cheerily in order to hide their emotions . 
In the long summer twilight , the boulevards were filling with crowds . 
Those from the outlying districts were converging toward the centre of the city , as in the remote revolutionary days , banding together in groups , forming an endless multitude from which came shouts and songs . 
These manifestations were passing through the centre under the electric lights that were just being turned on , the processions generally lasting until midnight , with the national banner floating above the walking crowds , escorted by the flags of other nations . 
It was on one of these nights of sincere enthusiasm that the two friends heard an unexpected , astonishing piece of news . 
`` They have killed Jaures ! '' 
The groups were repeating it from one to another with an amazement which seemed to overpower their grief . 
`` Jaures assassinated ! 
And what for ? '' 
The best popular element , which instinctively seeks an explanation of every proceeding , remained in suspense , not knowing which way to turn . 
The tribune dead , at the very moment that his word as welder of the people was most needed ! 
... Argensola thought immediately of Tchernoff . 
`` What will our neighbors say ? '' 
... The quiet , orderly people of Paris were fearing a revolution , and for a few moments Desnoyers believed that his cousin 's auguries were about to be fulfilled . 
This assassination , with its retaliations , might be the signal for civil war . 
But the masses of the people , worn out with grief at the death of their hero , were waiting in tragic silence . 
All were seeing , beyond his dead body , the image of the country . 
By the following morning , the danger had vanished . 
The laboring classes were talking of generals and war , showing each other their little military memorandums , announcing the date of their departure as soon as the order of mobilization should be published . 
`` I go the second day . '' 
`` I the first . '' 
Those of the standing army who were on leave were recalled individually to the barracks . 
All these events were tending in the same direction -- war . 
The Germans were invading Luxembourg ; the Germans were ordering their armies to invade the French frontier when their ambassador was still in Paris making promises of peace . 
On the day after the death of Jaures , the first of August , the people were crowding around some pieces of paper , written by hand and in evident haste . 
These papers were copies of other larger printed sheets , headed by two crossed flags . 
`` It has come ; it is now a fact ! '' 
... It was the order for general mobilization . 
All France was about to take up arms , and chests seemed to expand with a sigh of relief . 
Eyes were sparkling with excitement . 
The nightmare was at last over ! 
... Cruel reality was preferable to the uncertainty of days and days , each as long as a week . 
In vain President Poincare , animated by a last hope , was explaining to the French that `` mobilization is not necessarily war , that a call to arms may be simply a preventive measure . '' 
`` It is war , inevitable war , '' said the populace with a fatalistic expression . 
And those who were going to start that very night or the following day were the most eager and enthusiastic . 
-- `` Now those who seek us are going to find us ! 
Vive la France ! '' 
The Chant du Depart , the martial hymn of the volunteers of the first Republic , had been exhumed by the instinct of a people which seek the voice of Art in its most critical moments . 
The stanzas of the conservative Chenier , adapted to a music of warlike solemnity , were resounding through the streets , at the same time as the Marseillaise : La Republique nous appelle . 
Sachons vaincre ou sachons perir ; Un francais doit vivre pour elle . 
Pour elle un francais doit mourir . 
The mobilization began at midnight to the minute . 
At dusk , groups of men began moving through the streets towards the stations . 
Their families were walking beside them , carrying the valise or bundle of clothes . 
They were escorted by the friends of their district , the tricolored flag borne aloft at the head of these platoons . 
The Reserves were donning their old uniforms which presented all the difficulties of suits long ago forgotten . 
With new leather belts and their revolvers at their sides , they were betaking themselves to the railway which was to carry them to the point of concentration . 
One of their children was carrying the old sword in its cloth sheath . 
The wife was hanging on his arm , sad and proud at the same time , giving her last counsels in a loving whisper . 
Street cars , automobiles and cabs rolled by with crazy velocity . 
Nobody had ever seen so many vehicles in the Paris streets , yet if anybody needed one , he called in vain to the conductors , for none wished to serve mere civilians . 
All means of transportation were for military men , all roads ended at the railroad stations . 
The heavy trucks of the administration , filled with sacks , were saluted with general enthusiasm . 
`` Hurrah for the army ! '' 
The soldiers in mechanic 's garb , on top of the swaying pyramid , replied to the cheers , waving their arms and uttering shouts that nobody pretended to understand . 
Fraternity had created a tolerance hitherto unknown . 
The crowds were pressing forward , but in their encounters , invariably preserved good order . 
Vehicles were running into each other , and when the conductors resorted to the customary threats , the crowds would intervene and make them shake hands . 
`` Three cheers for France ! '' 
The pedestrians , escaping between the wheels of the automobiles were laughing and good-naturedly reproaching the chauffeur with , `` Would you kill a Frenchman on his way to his regiment ? '' 
and the conductor would reply , `` I , too , am going in a few hours . 
This is my last trip . '' 
As night approached , cars and cabs were running with increasing irregularity , many of the employees having abandoned their posts to take leave of their families and make the train . 
All the life of Paris was concentrating itself in a half-dozen human rivers emptying in the stations . 
Desnoyers and Argensola met in a boulevard cafe toward midnight . 
Both were exhausted by the day 's emotions and under that nervous depression which follows noisy and violent spectacles . 
They needed to rest . 
War was a fact , and now that it was a certainty , they felt no anxiety to get further news . 
Remaining in the cafe proved impossible . 
In the hot and smoky atmosphere , the occupants were singing and shouting and waving tiny flags . 
All the battle hymns of the past and present were here intoned in chorus , to an accompaniment of glasses and plates . 
The rather cosmopolitan clientele was reviewing the European nations . 
All , absolutely all , were going to enroll themselves on the side of France . 
`` Hurrah ! 
... Hurrah ! '' 
... An old man and his wife were seated at a table near the two friends . 
They were tenants , of an orderly , humdrum walk in life , who perhaps in all their existence had never been awake at such an hour . 
In the general enthusiasm they had come to the boulevards `` in order to see war a little closer . '' 
The foreign tongue used by his neighbors gave the husband a lofty idea of their importance . 
`` Do you believe that England is going to join us ? '' 
... Argensola knew as much about it as he , but he replied authoritatively , `` Of course she will . 
That 's a sure thing ! '' 
The old man rose to his feet : `` Hurrah for England ! '' 
and he began chanting a forgotten patriotic song , marking time with his arms in a spirited way , to the great admiration of his old wife , and urging all to join in the chorus that very few were able to follow . 
The two friends had to take themselves home on foot . 
They could not find a vehicle that would stop for them ; all were hurrying in the opposite direction toward the stations . 
They were both in a bad humor , but Argensola could n't keep his to himself . 
`` Ah , these women ! '' 
Desnoyers knew all about his relations -LRB- so far honorable -RRB- with a midinette from the rue Taitbout . 
Sunday strolls in the suburbs of Paris , various trips to the moving picture shows , comments upon the fine points of the latest novel published in the sheets of a popular paper , kisses of farewell when she took the night train from Bois Colombes in order to sleep at home -- that was all . 
But Argensola was wickedly counting on Father Time to mellow the sharpest virtues . 
That evening they had taken some refreshment with a French friend who was going the next morning to join his regiment . 
The girl had sometimes seen him with Argensola without noticing him particularly , but now she suddenly began admiring him as though he were another person . 
She had given up the idea of returning home that night ; she wanted to see how a war begins . 
The three had dined together , and all her interest had centred upon the one who was going away . 
She even took offense , with sudden modesty , when Argensola tried as he had often done before , to squeeze her hand under the table . 
Meanwhile she was almost leaning her head on the shoulder of the future hero , enveloping him with admiring gaze . 
`` And they have gone ... . 
They have gone away together ! '' 
said the Spaniard bitterly . 
`` I had to leave them in order not to make my hard luck any worse . 
To have worked so long ... for another ! '' 
He was silent for a few minutes , then changing the trend of his ideas , he added : `` I recognize , nevertheless , that her behavior is beautiful . 
The generosity of these women when they believe that the moment for sacrifice has come ! 
She is terribly afraid of her father , and yet she stays away from home all night with a person whom she hardly knows , and whom she was not even thinking of in the middle of the afternoon ! 
... The entire nation feels gratitude toward those who are going to imperil their lives , and she , poor child , wishing to do something , too , for those destined for death , to give them a little pleasure in their last hour ... is giving the best she has , that which she can never recover . 
I have sketched her role poorly , perhaps ... . 
Laugh at me if you want to , but admit that it is beautiful . '' 
Desnoyers laughed heartily at his friend 's discomfiture , in spite of the fact that he , too , was suffering a good deal of secret annoyance . 
He had seen Marguerite but once since the day of his return . 
The only news of her that he had received was by letter ... . 
This cursed war ! 
What an upset for happy people ! 
Marguerite 's mother was ill . 
She was brooding over the departure of her son , an officer , on the first day of the mobilization . 
Marguerite , too , was uneasy about her brother and did not think it expedient to come to the studio while her mother was grieving at home . 
When was this situation ever to end ? 
... That check for four hundred thousand francs which he had brought from America was also worrying him . 
The day before , the bank had declined to pay it for lack of the customary official advice . 
Afterward they said that they had received the advice , but did not give him the money . 
That very afternoon , when the trust companies had closed their doors , the government had already declared a moratorium , in order to prevent a general bankruptcy due to the general panic . 
When would they pay him ? 
... Perhaps when the war which had not yet begun was ended -- perhaps never . 
He had no other money available except the two thousand francs left over from his travelling expenses . 
All of his friends were in the same distressing situation , unable to draw on the sums which they had in the banks . 
Those who had any money were obliged to go from shop to shop , or form in line at the bank doors , in order to get a bill changed . 
Oh , this war ! 
This stupid war ! 
In the Champs Elysees , they saw a man with a broad-brimmed hat who was walking slowly ahead of them and talking to himself . 
Argensola recognized him as he passed near the street lamp , `` Friend Tchernoff . '' 
Upon returning their greeting , the Russian betrayed a slight odor of wine . 
Uninvited , he had adjusted his steps to theirs , accompanying them toward the Arc de Triomphe . 
Julio had merely exchanged silent nods with Argensola 's new acquaintance when encountering him in the vestibule ; but sadness softens the heart and makes us seek the friendship of the humble as a refreshing shelter . 
Tchernoff , on the contrary , looked at Desnoyers as though he had known him all his life . 
The man had interrupted his monologue , heard only by the black masses of vegetation , the blue shadows perforated by the reddish tremors of the street lights , the summer night with its cupola of warm breezes and twinkling stars . 
He took a few steps without saying anything , as a mark of consideration to his companions , and then renewed his arguments , taking them up where he had broken off , without offering any explanation , as though he were still talking to himself ... `` And at this very minute , they are shouting with enthusiasm the same as they are doing here , honestly believing that they are going to defend their outraged country , wishing to die for their families and firesides that nobody has threatened . '' 
`` Who are ` they , ' Tchernoff ? '' 
asked Argensola . 
The Russian stared at him as though surprised at such a question . 
`` They , '' he said laconically . 
The two understood ... . 
THEY ! 
It could not be anyone else . 
`` I have lived ten years in Germany , '' he continued , connecting up his words , now that he found himself listened to . 
`` I was daily correspondent for a paper in Berlin and I know these people . 
Passing along these thronged boulevards , I have been seeing in my imagination what must be happening there at this hour . 
They , too , are singing and shouting with enthusiasm as they wave their flags . 
On the outside , they seem just alike -- but oh , what a difference within ! 
... Last night the people beset a few babblers in the boulevard who were yelling , ` To Berlin ! ' 
-- a slogan of bad memories and worse taste . 
France does not wish conquests ; her only desire is to be respected , to live in peace without humiliations or disturbances . 
To-night two of the mobilized men said on leaving , ` When we enter Germany we are going to make it a republic ! ' 
... A republic is not a perfect thing , but it is better than living under an irresponsible monarchy by the grace of God . 
It at least presupposes tranquillity and absence of the personal ambitions that disturb life . 
I was impressed by the generous thought of these laboring men who , instead of wishing to exterminate their enemies , were planning to give them something better . '' 
Tchernoff remained silent a few minutes , smiling ironically at the picture which his imagination was calling forth . 
`` In Berlin , the masses are expressing their enthusiasm in the lofty phraseology befitting a superior people . 
Those in the lowest classes , accustomed to console themselves for humiliations with a gross materialism , are now crying ` Nach Paris ! 
We are going to drink champagne gratis ! ' 
The pietistic burgher , ready to do anything to attain a new honor , and the aristocracy which has given the world the greatest scandals of recent years , are also shouting , ` Nach Paris ! ' 
To them Paris is the Babylon of the deadly sin , the city of the Moulin Rouge and the restaurants of Montmartre , the only places that they know ... . 
And my comrades of the Social-Democracy , they are also cheering , but to another tune . 
-- ` To-morrow ! 
To St. Petersburg ! 
Russian ascendency , the menace of civilization , must be obliterated ! ' 
The Kaiser waving the tyranny of another country as a scarecrow to his people ! 
... What a joke ! '' 
And the loud laugh of the Russian sounded through the night like the noise of wooden clappers . 
`` We are more civilized than the Germans , '' he said , regaining his self-control . 
Desnoyers , who had been listening with great interest , now gave a start of surprise , saying to himself , `` This Tchernoff has been drinking . '' 
`` Civilization , '' continued the Socialist , `` does not consist merely in great industry , in many ships , armies and numerous universities that only teach science . 
That is material civilization . 
There is another , a superior one , that elevates the soul and does not permit human dignity to suffer without protesting against continual humiliations . 
A Swiss living in his wooden chalet and considering himself the equal of the other men of his country , is more civilized than the Herr Professor who gives precedence to a lieutenant , or to a Hamburg millionaire who , in turn , bends his neck like a lackey before those whose names are prefixed by a von . '' 
Here the Spaniard assented as though he could guess what Tchernoff was going to say . 
`` We Russians endure great tyranny . 
I know something about that . 
I know the hunger and cold of Siberia ... . 
But opposed to our tyranny has always existed a revolutionary protest . 
Part of the nation is half-barbarian , but the rest has a superior mentality , a lofty moral spirit which faces danger and sacrifice because of liberty and truth . 
... And Germany ? 
Who there has ever raised a protest in order to defend human rights ? 
What revolutions have ever broken out in Prussia , the land of the great despots ? 
`` Frederick William , the founder of militarism , when he was tired of beating his wife and spitting in his children 's plates , used to sally forth , thong in hand , in order to cowhide those subjects who did not get out of his way in time . 
His son , Frederick the Great , declared that he died , bored to death with governing a nation of slaves . 
In two centuries of Prussian history , one single revolution -- the barricades of 1848 -- a bad Berlinish copy of the Paris revolution , and without any result . 
Bismarck corrected with a heavy hand so as to crush completely the last attempts at protest -- if such ever really existed . 
And when his friends were threatening him with revolution , the ferocious Junker , merely put his hands on his hips and roared with the most insolent of horse laughs . 
A revolution in Prussia ! 
... Nothing at all , as he knew his people ! '' 
Tchernoff was not a patriot . 
Many a time Argensola had heard him railing against his country , but now he was indignant in view of the contempt with which Teutonic haughtiness was treating the Russian nation . 
Where , in the last forty years of imperial grandeur , was that universal supremacy of which the Germans were everlastingly boasting ? 
... Excellent workers in science ; tenacious and short-sighted academicians , each wrapped in his specialty ! 
-- Benedictines of the laboratory who experimented painstakingly and occasionally hit upon something , in spite of enormous blunders given out as truths , because they were their own ... that was all ! 
And side by side with such patient laboriosity , really worthy of respect -- what charlatanism ! 
What great names exploited as a shop sample ! 
How many sages turned into proprietors of sanatoriums ! 
... A Herr Professor discovers the cure of tuberculosis , and the tubercular keep on dying as before . 
Another labels with a number the invincible remedy for the most unconfessable of diseases , and the genital scourge continues afflicting the world . 
And all these errors were representing great fortunes , each saving panacea bringing into existence an industrial corporation selling its products at high prices -- as though suffering were a privilege of the rich . 
How different from the bluff Pasteur and other clever men of the inferior races who have given their discoveries to the world without stooping to form monopolies ! 
`` German science , '' continued Tchernoff , `` has given much to humanity , I admit that ; but the science of other nations has done as much . 
Only a nation puffed up with conceit could imagine that it has done everything for civilization , and the others nothing ... . 
Apart from their learned specialists , what genius has been produced in our day by this Germany which believes itself so transcendent ? 
Wagner , the last of the romanticists , closes an epoch and belongs to the past . 
Nietzsche took pains to proclaim his Polish origin and abominated Germany , a country , according to him , of middle-class pedants . 
His Slavism was so pronounced that he even prophesied the overthrow of the Prussians by the Slavs . 
... And there are others . 
We , although a savage people , have given the world of modern times an admirable moral grandeur . 
Tolstoi and Dostoievsky are world-geniuses . 
What names can the Germany of William II put ahead of these ? 
... His country was the country of music , but the Russian musicians of to-day are more original than the mere followers of Wagner , the copyists who take refuge in orchestral exasperations in order to hide their mediocrity ... . 
In its time of stress the German nation had men of genius , before Pan-Germanism had been born , when the Empire did not exist . 
Goethe , Schiller , Beethoven were subjects of little principalities . 
They received influence from other countries and contributed their share to the universal civilization like citizens of the world , without insisting that the world should , therefore , become Germanized . '' 
Czarism had committed atrocities . 
Tchernoff knew that by experience , and did not need the Germans to assure him of it . 
But all the illustrious classes of Russia were enemies of that tyranny and were protesting against it . 
Where in Germany were the intellectual enemies of Prussian Czarism ? 
They were either holding their peace , or breaking forth into adulation of the anointed of the Lord -- a musician and comedian like Nero , of a sharp and superficial intelligence , who believed that by merely skimming through anything he knew it all . 
Eager to strike a spectacular pose in history , he had finally afflicted the world with the greatest of calamities . 
`` Why must the tyranny that weighs upon my country necessarily be Russian ? 
The worst Czars were imitators of Prussia . 
Every time that the Russian people of our day have attempted to revindicate their rights , the reactionaries have used the Kaiser as a threat , proclaiming that he would come to their aid . 
One-half of the Russian aristocracy is German ; the functionaries who advise and support despotism are Germans ; German , too , are the generals who have distinguished themselves by massacring the people ; German are the officials who undertake to punish the laborers ' strikes and the rebellion of their allies . 
The reactionary Slav is brutal , but he has the fine sensibility of a race in which many princes have become Nihilists . 
He raises the lash with facility , but then he repents and oftentimes weeps . 
I have seen Russian officials kill themselves rather than march against the people , or through remorse for slaughter committed . 
The German in the service of the Czar feels no scruples , nor laments his conduct . 
He kills coldly , with the minuteness and exactitude with which he does everything . 
The Russian is a barbarian who strikes and regrets ; German civilization shoots without hesitation . 
Our Slav Czar , in a humanitarian dream , favored the Utopian idea of universal peace , organizing the Conference of The Hague . 
The Kaiser of culture , meanwhile , has been working years and years in the erection and establishment of a destructive organ of an immensity heretofore unknown , in order to crush all Europe . 
The Russian is a humble Christian , socialistic , democratic , thirsting for justice ; the German prides himself upon his Christianity , but is an idolator like the German of other centuries . 
His religion loves blood and maintains castes ; his true worship is that of Odin ; -- only that nowadays , the god of slaughter has changed his name and calls himself , ` The State ' ! '' 
Tchernoff paused an instant -- perhaps in order to increase the wonder of his companions -- and then said with simplicity : `` I am a Christian . '' 
Argensola , who already knew the ideas and history of the Russian , started with astonishment , and Julio persisted in his suspicion , `` Surely Tchernoff is drunk . '' 
`` It is true , '' declared the Russian earnestly , `` that I do not worry about God , nor do I believe in dogmas , but my soul is Christian as is that of all revolutionists . 
The philosophy of modern democracy is lay Christianity . 
We Socialists love the humble , the needy , the weak . 
We defend their right to life and well-being , as did the greatest lights of the religious world who saw a brother in every unfortunate . 
We exact respect for the poor in the name of justice ; the others ask for it in the name of charity . 
That only separates us . 
But we strive that mankind may , by common consent , lead a better life , that the strong may sacrifice for the weak , the lofty for the lowly , and the world be ruled by brotherliness , seeking the greatest equality possible . '' 
The Slav reviewed the history of human aspirations . 
Greek thought had brought comfort , a sense of well-being on the earth -- but only for the few , for the citizens of the little democracies , for the free men , leaving the slaves and barbarians who constituted the majority , in their misery . 
Christianity , the religion of the lowly , had recognized the right of happiness for all mankind , but this happiness was placed in heaven , far from this world , this `` vale of tears . '' 
The Revolution and its heirs , the Socialists , were trying to place happiness in the immediate realities of earth , like the ancients , but making all humanity participants in it like the Christians . 
`` Where is the ` Christianity of modern Germany ? 
... There is far more genuine Christian spirit in the fraternal laity of the French Republic , defender of the weak , than in the religiosity of the conservative Junkers . 
Germany has made a god in her own image , believing that she adores it , but in reality adoring her own image . 
The German God is a reflex of the German State which considers war as the first activity of a nation and the noblest of occupations . 
Other Christian peoples , when they have to go to war , feel the contradiction that exists between their conduct and the teachings of the Gospel , and excuse themselves by showing the cruel necessity which impels them . 
Germany declares that war is acceptable to God . 
I have heard German sermons proving that Jesus was in favor of Militarism . 
`` Teutonic pride , the conviction that its race is providentially destined to dominate the world , brings into working unity their Protestants , Catholics and Jews . 
`` Far above their differences of dogma is that God of the State which is German -- the Warrior God to whom William is probably referring as ` my worthy Ally . ' 
Religions always tend toward universality . 
Their aim is to place humanity in relationship with God , and to sustain these relations among mankind . 
Prussia has retrograded to barbarism , creating for its personal use a second Jehovah , a divinity hostile to the greater part of the human race who makes his own the grudges and ambitions of the German people . '' 
Tchernoff then explained in his own way the creation of this Teutonic God , ambitious , cruel and vengeful . 
The Germans were comparatively recent Christians . 
Their Christianity was not more than six centuries old . 
When the Crusades were drawing to a close , the Prussians were still living in paganism . 
Pride of race , impelling them to war , had revived these dead divinities . 
The God of the Gospel was now adorned by the Germans with lance and shield like the old Teutonic god who was a military chief . 
`` Christianity in Berlin wears helmet and riding boots . 
God at this moment is seeing Himself mobilized the same as Otto , Fritz and Franz , in order to punish the enemies of His chosen people . 
That the Lord has commanded , ` Thou shalt not kill , ' and His Son has said to the world , ` Blessed are the peacemakers , ' no longer matters . 
Christianity , according to its German priests of all creeds , can only influence the individual betterment of mankind , and should not mix itself in affairs of state . 
The Prussian God of the State is ` the old German God , ' the lineal descendant of the ferocious Germanic mythology , a mixture of divinities hungry for war . '' 
In the silence of the avenue , the Russian evoked the ruddy figures of the implacable gods , that were going to awake that night upon hearing the hum of arms and smelling the acrid odor of blood . 
Thor , the brutal god with the little head , was stretching his biceps and clutching the hammer that crushed cities . 
Wotan was sharpening his lance which had the lightning for its handle , the thunder for its blade . 
Odin , the one-eyed , was gaping with gluttony on the mountain-tops , awaiting the dead warriors that would crowd around his throne . 
The dishevelled Valkyries , fat and perspiring , were beginning to gallop from cloud to cloud , hallooing to humanity that they might carry off the corpses doubled like saddle bags , over the haunches of their flying nags . 
`` German religiosity , '' continued the Russian , `` is the disavowal of Christianity . 
In its eyes , men are no longer equal before God . 
Their God is interested only in the strong , and favors them with his support so that they may dare anything . 
Those born weak must either submit or disappear . 
Neither are nations equal , but are divided into leaders and inferior races whose destiny is to be sifted out and absorbed by their superiors . 
Since God has thus ordained , it is unnecessary to state that the grand world-leader is Germany . '' 
Argensola here interrupted to observe that German pride believed itself championed not only by God but by science , too . 
`` I know that , '' interposed the Russian without letting him finish -- `` generalization , inequality , selection , the struggle for life , and all that ... . 
The Germans , so conceited about their special worth , erect upon distant ground their intellectual monuments , borrowing of the foreigner their foundation material whenever they undertake a new line of work . 
A Frenchman and an Englishman , Gobineau and Chamberlain , have given them the arguments with which to defend the superiority of their race . 
With the rubbish left over from Darwin and Spencer , their old Haeckel has built up his doctrine of ` Monism ' which , applied to politics , scientifically consecrates Prussian pride and recognizes its right to rule the world by force . '' 
