The property ought to be made self-supporting . 
Not that he had any fear of the expenses , but he did not intend to lose money on the proposition . 
The acquisition of the castle brought Desnoyers a true friendship -- the chief advantage in the transaction . 
He became acquainted with a neighbor , Senator Lacour , who twice had been Minister of State , and was now vegetating in the senate , silent during its sessions , but restless and voluble in the corridors in order to maintain his influence . 
He was a prominent figure of the republican nobility , an aristocrat of the new regime that had sprung from the agitations of the Revolution , just as the titled nobility had won their spurs in the Crusades . 
His great-grandfather had belonged to the Convention . 
His father had figured in the Republic of 1848 . 
He , as the son of an exile who had died in banishment , had when very young marched behind the grandiloquent figure of Gambetta , and always spoke in glowing terms of the Master , in the hope that some of his rays might be reflected on his disciple . 
His son Rene , a pupil of the Ecole Centrale regarded his father as `` a rare old sport , '' laughing a little at his romantic and humanitarian republicanism . 
He , nevertheless , was counting much on that same official protection treasured by four generations of Lacours dedicated to the service of the Republic , to assist him when he became an engineer . 
Don Marcelo who used to look uneasily upon any new friendship , fearing a demand for a loan , gave himself up with enthusiasm to intimacy with this `` grand man . '' 
The personage admired riches and recognized , besides , a certain genius in this millionaire from the other side of the sea accustomed to speaking of limitless pastures and immense herds . 
Their intercourse was more than the mere friendliness of a country neighborhood , and continued on after their return to Paris . 
Finally Rene visited the home on the avenida Victor Hugo as though it were his own . 
The only disappointments in Desnoyers ' new life came from his children . 
Chichi irritated him because of the independence of her tastes . 
She did not like antiques , no matter how substantial and magnificent they might be , much preferring the frivolities of the latest fashion . 
She accepted all her father 's gifts with great indifference . 
Before an exquisite blonde piece of lace , centuries old , picked up at auction , she made a wry face , saying , `` I would much rather have had a new dress costing three hundred francs . '' 
She and her brother were solidly opposed to everything old . 
Now that his daughter was already a woman , he had confided her absolutely to the care of Dona Luisa . 
But the former `` Peoncito '' was not showing much respect for the advice and commands of the good natured Creole . 
She had taken up roller-skating with enthusiasm , regarding it as the most elegant of diversions . 
She would go every afternoon to the Ice Palace , Dona Luisa chaperoning her , although to do this she was obliged to give up accompanying her husband to his sales . 
Oh , the hours of deadly weariness before that frozen oval ring , watching the white circle of balancing human monkeys gliding by on runners to the sound of an organ ! 
... Her daughter would pass and repass before her tired eyes , rosy from the exercise , spirals of hair escaped from her hat , streaming out behind , the folds of her skirt swinging above her skates -- handsome , athletic and Amazonian , with the rude health of a child who , according to her father , `` had been weaned on beefsteaks . '' 
Finally Dona Luisa rebelled against this troublesome vigilance , preferring to accompany her husband on his hunt for underpriced riches . 
Chichi went to the skating rink with one of the dark-skinned maids , passing the afternoons with her sporty friends of the new world . 
Together they ventilated their ideas under the glare of the easy life of Paris , freed from the scruples and conventions of their native land . 
They all thought themselves older than they were , delighting to discover in each other unsuspected charms . 
The change from the other hemisphere had altered their sense of values . 
Some were even writing verses in French . 
And Desnoyers became alarmed , giving free rein to his bad humor , when Chichi of evenings , would bring forth as aphorisms that which she and her friends had been discussing , as a summary of their readings and observations . 
-- `` Life is life , and one must live ! 
... I will marry the man I love , no matter who he may be ... '' But the daughter 's independence was as nothing compared to the worry which the other child gave the Desnoyers . 
Ay , that other one ! 
... Julio , upon arriving in Paris , had changed the bent of his aspirations . 
He no longer thought of becoming an engineer ; he wished to become an artist . 
Don Marcelo objected in great consternation , but finally yielded . 
Let it be painting ! 
The important thing was to have some regular profession . 
The father , while he considered property and wealth as sacred rights , felt that no one should enjoy them who had not worked to acquire them . 
Recalling his apprenticeship as a wood carver , he began to hope that the artistic instincts which poverty had extinguished in him were , perhaps , reappearing in his son . 
What if this lazy boy , this lively genius , hesitating before taking up his walk in life , should turn out to be a famous painter , after all ! 
... So he agreed to all of Julio 's caprices , the budding artist insisting that for his first efforts in drawing and coloring , he needed a separate apartment where he could work with more freedom . 
His father , therefore , established him near his home , in the rue de la Pompe in the former studio of a well-known foreign painter . 
The workroom and its annexes were far too large for an amateur , but the owner had died , and Desnoyers improved the opportunity offered by the heirs , and bought at a remarkable bargain , the entire plant , pictures and furnishings . 
Dona Luisa at first visited the studio daily like a good mother , caring for the well-being of her son that he may work to better advantage . 
Taking off her gloves , she emptied the brass trays filled with cigar stubs and dusted the furniture powdered with the ashes fallen from the pipes . 
Julio 's visitors , long-haired young men who spoke of things that she could not understand , seemed to her rather careless in their manners ... . 
Later on she also met there women , very lightly clad , and was received with scowls by her son . 
Was n't his mother ever going to let him work in peace ? 
... So the poor lady , starting out in the morning toward the rue de la Pompe , stopped midway and went instead to the church of Saint Honore d'Eylau . 
The father displayed more prudence . 
A man of his years could not expect to mingle with the chums of a young artist . 
In a few months ' time , Julio passed entire weeks without going to sleep under the paternal roof . 
Finally he installed himself permanently in his studio , occasionally making a flying trip home that his family might know that he was still in existence ... . 
Some mornings , Desnoyers would arrive at the rue de la Pompe in order to ask a few questions of the concierge . 
It was ten o'clock ; the artist was sleeping . 
Upon returning at midday , he learned that the heavy sleep still continued . 
Soon after lunch , another visit to get better news . 
It was two o'clock , the young gentleman was just arising . 
So the father would retire , muttering stormily -- `` But when does this painter ever paint ? '' 
... At first Julio had tried to win renown with his brush , believing that it would prove an easy task . 
In true artist fashion , he collected his friends around him , South American boys with nothing to do but enjoy life , scattering money ostentatiously so that everybody might know of their generosity . 
With serene audacity , the young canvas-dauber undertook to paint portraits . 
He loved good painting , `` distinctive '' painting , with the cloying sweetness of a romance , that copied only the forms of women . 
He had money , a good studio , his father was standing behind him ready to help -- why should n't he accomplish as much as many others who lacked his opportunities ? 
... So he began his work by coloring a canvas entitled , `` The Dance of the Hours , '' a mere pretext for copying pretty girls and selecting buxom models . 
These he would sketch at a mad speed , filling in the outlines with blobs of multi-colored paint , and up to this point all went well . 
Then he would begin to vacillate , remaining idle before the picture only to put it in the corner in hope of later inspiration . 
It was the same way with his various studies of feminine heads . 
Finding that he was never able to finish anything , he soon became resigned , like one who pants with fatigue before an obstacle waiting for a providential interposition to save him . 
The important thing was to be a painter ... even though he might not paint anything . 
This afforded him the opportunity , on the plea of lofty aestheticism , of sending out cards of invitation and asking light women to his studio . 
He lived during the night . 
Don Marcelo , upon investigating the artist 's work , could not contain his indignation . 
Every morning the two Desnoyers were accustomed to greet the first hours of dawn -- the father leaping from his bed , the son , on his way home to his studio to throw himself upon his couch not to wake till midday . 
The credulous Dona Luisa would invent the most absurd explanations to defend her son . 
Who could tell ? 
Perhaps he had the habit of painting during the night , utilizing it for original work . 
Men resort to so many devilish things ! 
... Desnoyers knew very well what these nocturnal gusts of genius were amounting to -- scandals in the restaurants of Montmartre , and scrimmages , many scrimmages . 
He and his gang , who believed that at seven a full dress or Tuxedo was indispensable , were like a band of Indians , bringing to Paris the wild customs of the plains . 
Champagne always made them quarrelsome . 
So they broke and paid , but their generosities were almost invariably followed by a scuffle . 
No one could surpass Julio in the quick slap and the ready card . 
His father heard with a heavy heart the news brought him by some friends thinking to flatter his vanity -- his son was always victorious in these gentlemanly encounters ; he it was who always scratched the enemy 's skin . 
The painter knew more about fencing than art . 
He was a champion with various weapons ; he could box , and was even skilled in the favorite blows of the prize fighters of the slums . 
`` Useless as a drone , and as dangerous , too , '' fretted his father . 
And yet in the back of his troubled mind fluttered an irresistible satisfaction -- an animal pride in the thought that this hare-brained terror was his own . 
For a while , he thought that he had hit upon a way of withdrawing his son from such an existence . 
The relatives in Berlin had visited the Desnoyers in their castle of Villeblanche . 
With good-natured superiority , Karl von Hartrott had appreciated the rich and rather absurd accumulations of his brother-in-law . 
They were not bad ; he admitted that they gave a certain cachet to the home in Paris and to the castle . 
They smacked of the possessions of titled nobility . 
But Germany ! 
... The comforts and luxuries in his country ! 
... He just wished his brother-in-law to admire the way he lived and the noble friendships that embellished his opulence . 
And so he insisted in his letters that the Desnoyers family should return their visit . 
This change of environment might tone Julio down a little . 
Perhaps his ambition might waken on seeing the diligence of his cousins , each with a career . 
The Frenchman had , besides , an underlying belief in the more corrupt influence of Paris as compared with the purity of the customs in Patriarchal Germany . 
They were there four months . 
In a little while Desnoyers felt ready to retreat . 
Each to his own kind ; he would never be able to understand such people . 
Exceedingly amiable , with an abject amiability and evident desire to please , but constantly blundering through a tactless desire to make their grandeur felt . 
The high-toned friends of Hartrott emphasized their love for France , but it was the pious love that a weak and mischievous child inspires , needing protection . 
And they would accompany their affability with all manner of inopportune memories of the wars in which France had been conquered . 
Everything in Germany -- a monument , a railroad station , a simple dining-room device , instantly gave rise to glorious comparisons . 
`` In France , you do not have this , '' `` Of course , you never saw anything like this in America . '' 
Don Marcelo came away fatigued by so much condescension , and his wife and daughter refused to be convinced that the elegance of Berlin could be superior to Paris . 
Chichi , with audacious sacrilege , scandalized her cousins by declaring that she could not abide the corseted officers with immovable monocle , who bowed to the women with such automatic rigidity , blending their gallantries with an air of superiority . 
Julio , guided by his cousins , was saturated in the virtuous atmosphere of Berlin . 
With the oldest , `` The Sage , '' he had nothing to do . 
He was a poor creature devoted to his books who patronized all the family with a protecting air . 
It was the others , the sub-lieutenants or military students , who proudly showed him the rounds of German joy . 
Julio was accordingly introduced to all the night restaurants -- imitations of those in Paris , but on a much larger scale . 
The women who in Paris might be counted by the dozens appeared here in hundreds . 
The scandalous drunkenness here never came by chance , but always by design as an indispensable part of the gaiety . 
All was grandiose , glittering , colossal . 
The libertines diverted themselves in platoons , the public got drunk in companies , the harlots presented themselves in regiments . 
He felt a sensation of disgust before these timid and servile females , accustomed to blows , who were so eagerly trying to reimburse themselves for the losses and exposures of their business . 
For him , it was impossible to celebrate with hoarse ha-has , like his cousins , the discomfiture of these women when they realized that they had wasted so many hours without accomplishing more than abundant drinking . 
The gross obscenity , so public and noisy , like a parade of riches , was loathsome to Julio . 
`` There is nothing like this in Paris , '' his cousins repeatedly exulted as they admired the stupendous salons , the hundreds of men and women in pairs , the thousands of tipplers . 
`` No , there certainly was nothing like that in Paris . '' 
He was sick of such boundless pretension . 
He seemed to be attending a fiesta of hungry mariners anxious at one swoop to make amends for all former privations . 
Like his father , he longed to get away . 
It offended his aesthetic sense . 
Don Marcelo returned from this visit with melancholy resignation . 
Those people had undoubtedly made great strides . 
He was not such a blind patriot that he could not admit what was so evident . 
Within a few years they had transformed their country , and their industry was astonishing ... but , well ... it was simply impossible to have anything to do with them . 
Each to his own , but may they never take a notion to envy their neighbor ! 
... Then he immediately repelled this last suspicion with the optimism of a business man . 
`` They are going to be very rich , '' he thought . 
`` Their affairs are prospering , and he that is rich does not hunt quarrels . 
That war of which some crazy fools are always dreaming would be an impossible thing . '' 
Young Desnoyers renewed his Parisian existence , living entirely in the studio and going less and less to his father 's home . 
Dona Luisa began to speak of a certain Argensola , a very learned young Spaniard , believing that his counsels might prove most helpful to Julio . 
She did not know exactly whether this new companion was friend , master or servant . 
The studio habitues also had their doubts . 
The literary ones always spoke of Argensola as a painter . 
The painters recognized only his ability as a man of letters . 
He was among those who used to come up to the studio of winter afternoons , attracted by the ruddy glow of the stove and the wines secretly provided by the mother , holding forth authoritatively before the often-renewed bottle and the box of cigars lying open on the table . 
One night , he slept on the divan , as he had no regular quarters . 
After that first night , he lived entirely in the studio . 
Julio soon discovered in him an admirable reflex of his own personality . 
He knew that Argensola had come third-class from Madrid with twenty francs in his pocket , in order to `` capture glory , '' to use his own words . 
Upon observing that the Spaniard was painting with as much difficulty as himself , with the same wooden and childish strokes , which are so characteristic of the make-believe artists and pot-boilers , the routine workers concerned themselves with color and other rank fads . 
Argensola was a psychological artist , a painter of souls . 
And his disciple , felt astonished and almost displeased on learning what a comparatively simple thing it was to paint a soul . 
Upon a bloodless countenance , with a chin as sharp as a dagger , the gifted Spaniard would trace a pair of nearly round eyes , and at the centre of each pupil he would aim a white brush stroke , a point of light ... the soul . 
Then , planting himself before the canvas , he would proceed to classify this soul with his inexhaustible imagination , attributing to it almost every kind of stress and extremity . 
So great was the sway of his rapture that Julio , too , was able to see all that the artist flattered himself into believing that he had put into the owlish eyes . 
He , also , would paint souls ... souls of women . 
In spite of the ease with which he developed his psychological creations , Argensola preferred to talk , stretched on a divan , or to read , hugging the fire while his friend and protector was outside . 
Another advantage this fondness for reading gave young Desnoyers was that he was no longer obliged to open a volume , scanning the index and last pages `` just to get the idea . '' 
Formerly when frequenting society functions , he had been guilty of coolly asking an author which was his best book -- his smile of a clever man -- giving the writer to understand that he merely enquired so as not to waste time on the other volumes . 
Now it was no longer necessary to do this ; Argensola would read for him . 
As soon as Julio would see him absorbed in a book , he would demand an immediate share : `` Tell me the story . '' 
So the `` secretary , '' not only gave him the plots of comedies and novels , but also detailed the argument of Schopenhauer or of Nietzsche ... Dona Luisa almost wept on hearing her visitors -- with that benevolence which wealth always inspires -- speak of her son as `` a rather gay young man , but wonderfully well read ! '' 
In exchange for his lessons , Argensola received , much the same treatment as did the Greek slaves who taught rhetoric to the young patricians of decadent Rome . 
In the midst of a dissertation , his lord and friend would interrupt him with -- `` Get my dress suit ready . 
I am invited out this evening . '' 
At other times , when the instructor was luxuriating in bodily comfort , with a book in one hand near the roaring stove , seeing through the windows the gray and rainy afternoon , his disciple would suddenly appear saying , `` Quick , get out ! 
... There 's a woman coming ! '' 
And Argensola , like a dog who gets up and shakes himself , would disappear to continue his reading in some miserable little coffee house in the neighborhood . 
In his official capacity , this widely gifted man often descended from the peaks of intellectuality to the vulgarities of everyday life . 
He was the steward of the lord of the manor , the intermediary between the pocketbook and those who appeared bill in hand . 
`` Money ! '' 
he would say laconically at the end of the month , and Desnoyers would break out into complaints and curses . 
Where on earth was he to get it , he would like to know . 
His father was as regular as a machine , and would never allow the slightest advance upon the following month . 
He had to submit to a rule of misery . 
Three thousand francs a month ! 
-- what could any decent person do with that ? 
... He was even trying to cut THAT down , to tighten the band , interfering in the running of his house , so that Dona Luisa could not make presents to her son . 
In vain he had appealed to the various usurers of Paris , telling them of his property beyond the ocean . 
These gentlemen had the youth of their own country in the hollow of their hand and were not obliged to risk their capital in other lands . 
The same hard luck pursued him when , with sudden demonstrations of affection , he had tried to convince Don Marcelo that three thousand francs a month was but a niggardly trifle . 
The millionaire fairly snorted with indignation . 
`` Three thousand francs a trifle ! '' 
And the debts besides , that he often had to pay for his son ! 
... `` Why , when I was your age , '' ... he would begin saying -- but Julio would suddenly bring the dialogue to a close . 
He had heard his father 's story too many times . 
Ah , the stingy old miser ! 
What he had been giving him all these months was no more than the interest on his grandfather 's legacy ... . 
And by the advice of Argensola he ventured to get control of the field . 
He was planning to hand over the management of his land to Celedonio , the old overseer , who was now such a grandee in his country that Julio ironically called him `` my uncle . '' 
Desnoyers accepted this rebellion coldly . 
`` It appears just to me . 
You are now of age ! '' 
Then he promptly reduced to extremes his oversight of his home , forbidding Dona Luisa to handle any money . 
Henceforth he regarded his son as an adversary , treating him during his lightning apparitions at the avenue Victor Hugo with glacial courtesy as though he were a stranger . 
For a while a transitory opulence enlivened the studio . 
Julio had increased his expenses , considering himself rich . 
But the letters from his uncle in America soon dissipated these illusions . 
At first the remittances exceeded very slightly the monthly allowance that his father had made him . 
Then it began to diminish in an alarming manner . 
According to Celedonio , all the calamities on earth seemed to be falling upon his plantation . 
The pasture land was yielding scantily , sometimes for lack of rain , sometimes because of floods , and the herds were perishing by hundreds . 
Julio required more income , and the crafty half-breed sent him what he asked for , but simply as a loan , reserving the return until they should adjust their accounts . 
In spite of such aid , young Desnoyers was suffering great want . 
He was gambling now in an elegant circle , thinking thus to compensate for his periodical scrimpings ; but this resort was only making the remittances from America disappear with greater rapidity ... . 
That such a man as he was should be tormented so for the lack of a few thousand francs ! 
What else was a millionaire father for ? 
If the creditors began threatening , the poor youth had to bring the secretary into play , ordering him to see the mother immediately ; he himself wished to avoid her tears and reproaches . 
So Argensola would slip like a pickpocket up the service stairway of the great house on the avenue Victor Hugo . 
The place in which he transacted his ambassadorial business was the kitchen , with great danger that the terrible Desnoyers might happen in there , on one of his perambulations as a laboring man , and surprise the intruder . 
Dona Luisa would weep , touched by the heartrending tales of the messenger . 
What could she do ! 
She was as poor as her maids ; she had jewels , many jewels , but not a franc . 
Then Argensola came to the rescue with a solution worthy of his experience . 
He would smooth the way for the good mother , leaving some of her jewels at the Mont-de-Piete . 
He knew the way to raise money on them . 
So the lady accepted his advice , giving him , however , only jewels of medium value as she suspected that she might never see them again . 
Later scruples made her at times refuse flatly . 
Suppose Don Marcelo should ever find it out , what a scene ! 
... But the Spaniard deemed it unseemly to return empty-handed , and always bore away a basket of bottles from the well-stocked wine-cellar of the Desnoyers . 
Every morning Dona Luisa went to Saint-Honore-d'Eylau to pray for her son . 
She felt that this was her own church . 
It was a hospitable and familiar island in the unexplored ocean of Paris . 
Here she could exchange discreet salutations with her neighbors from the different republics of the new world . 
She felt nearer to God and the saints when she could hear in the vestibule conversations in her language . 
It was , moreover , a sort of salon in which took place the great events of the South American colony . 
One day was a wedding with flowers , orchestra and chanting chorals . 
With Chichi beside her , she greeted those she knew , congratulating the bride and groom . 
Another day it was the funeral of an ex-president of some republic , or some other foreign dignitary ending in Paris his turbulent existence . 
Poor President ! 
Poor General ! 
... Dona Luisa remembered the dead man . 
She had seen him many times in that church devoutly attending mass and she was indignant at the evil tongues which , under the cover of a funeral oration , recalled the shootings and bank failures in his country . 
Such a good and religious gentleman ! 
May God receive his soul in glory ! 
... And upon going out into the square , she would look with tender eyes upon the young men and women on horseback going to the Bois de Boulogne , the luxurious automobiles , the morning radiant in the sunshine , all the primeval freshness of the early hours -- realizing what a beautiful thing it is to live . 
Her devout expression of gratitude for mere existence usually included the monument in the centre of the square , all bristling with wings as if about to fly away from the ground . 
Victor Hugo ! 
... It was enough for her to have heard this name on the lips of her son to make her contemplate the statue with a family interest . 
The only thing that she knew about the poet was that he had died . 
Of this she was almost sure , and she imagined that in life , he was a great friend of Julio 's because she had so often heard her son repeat his name . 
Ay , her son ! 
... All her thoughts , her conjectures , her desires , converged on him and her strong-willed husband . 
She longed for the men to come to an understanding and put an end to a struggle in which she was the principal victim . 
Would not God work this miracle ? 
... Like an invalid who goes from one sanitarium to another in pursuit of health , she gave up the church on her street to attend the Spanish chapel on the avenue Friedland . 
Here she considered herself even more among her own . 
In the midst of the fine and elegant South American ladies who looked as if they had just escaped from a fashion sheet , her eyes sought other women , not so well dressed , fat , with theatrical ermine and antique jewelry . 
When these high-born dames met each other in the vestibule , they spoke with heavy voices and expressive gestures , emphasizing their words energetically . 
The daughter of the ranch ventured to salute them because she had subscribed to all their pet charities , and upon seeing her greeting returned , she felt a satisfaction which made her momentarily forget her woes . 
They belonged to those families which her father had so greatly admired without knowing why . 
They came from the `` mother country , '' and to the good Chicha were all Excelentisimas or Altisimas , related to kings . 
She did not know whether to give them her hand or bend the knee , as she had vaguely heard was the custom at court . 
But soon she recalled her preoccupation and went forward to wrestle in prayer with God . 
Ay , that he would mercifully remember her ! 
That he would not long forget her son ! 
... It was Glory that remembered Julio , stretching out to him her arms of light , so that he suddenly awoke to find himself surrounded by all the honors and advantages of celebrity . 
Fame cunningly surprises mankind on the most crooked and unexpected of roads . 
Neither the painting of souls nor a fitful existence full of extravagant love affairs and complicated duels had brought Desnoyers this renown . 
It was Glory that put him on his feet . 
A new pleasure for the delight of humanity had come from the other side of the seas . 
People were asking one another in the mysterious tones of the initiated who wish to recognize a familiar spirit , `` Do you know how to tango ? 
... '' The tango had taken possession of the world . 
It was the heroic hymn of a humanity that was suddenly concentrating its aspirations on the harmonious rhythm of the thigh joints , measuring its intelligence by the agility of its feet . 
An incoherent and monotonous music of African inspiration was satisfying the artistic ideals of a society that required nothing better . 
The world was dancing ... dancing ... dancing . 
A negro dance from Cuba introduced into South America by mariners who shipped jerked beef to the Antilles , conquered the entire earth in a few months , completely encircling it , bounding victoriously from nation to nation ... like the Marseillaise . 
It was even penetrating into the most ceremonious courts , overturning all traditions of conservation and etiquette like a song of the Revolution -- the revolution of frivolity . 
The Pope even had to become a master of the dance , recommending the `` Furlana '' instead of the `` Tango , '' since all the Christian world , regardless of sects , was united in the common desire to agitate its feet with the tireless frenzy of the `` possessed '' of the Middle Ages . 
Julio Desnoyers , upon meeting this dance of his childhood in full swing in Paris , devoted himself to it with the confidence that an old love inspires . 
Who could have foretold that when as a student , he was frequenting the lowest dance halls in Buenos Aires , watched by the police , that he was really serving an apprenticeship to Glory ? 
... From five to seven , in the salons of the Champs d'Elysees where it cost five francs for a cup of tea and the privilege of joining in the sacred dance , hundreds of eyes followed him with admiration . 
`` He has the key , '' said the women , appraising his slender elegance , medium stature , and muscular springs . 
And he , in abbreviated jacket and expansive shirt bosom , with his small , girlish feet encased in high-heeled patent leathers with white tops , danced gravely , thoughtfully , silently , like a mathematician working out a problem , under the lights that shed bluish tones upon his plastered , glossy locks . 
Ladies asked to be presented to him in the sweet hope that their friends might envy them when they beheld them in the arms of the master . 
Invitations simply rained upon Julio . 
The most exclusive salons were thrown open to him so that every afternoon he made a dozen new acquaintances . 
The fashion had brought over professors from the other side of the sea , compatriots from the slums of Buenos Aires , haughty and confused at being applauded like famous lecturers or tenors ; but Julio triumphed over these vulgarians who danced for money , and the incidents of his former life were considered by the women as deeds of romantic gallantry . 
`` You are killing yourself , '' Argensola would say . 
`` You are dancing too much . '' 
The glory of his friend and master was only making more trouble for him . 
His placid readings before the fire were now subject to daily interruptions . 
It was impossible to read more than a chapter . 
The celebrated man was continually ordering him to betake himself to the street . 
`` A new lesson , '' sighed the parasite . 
And when he was alone in the studio numerous callers -- all women , some inquisitive and aggressive , others sad , with a deserted air -- were constantly interrupting his thoughtful pursuits . 
One of them terrified the occupants of the studio with her insistence . 
She was a North American of uncertain age , somewhere between thirty-two and fifty-nine , with short skirts that whenever she sat down , seemed to fly up as if moved by a spring . 
Various dances with Desnoyers and a visit to the rue de la Pompe she seemed to consider as her sacred rights , and she pursued the master with the desperation of an abandoned zealot . 
Julio had made good his escape upon learning that this beauty of youthful elegance -- when seen from the back -- had two grandchildren . 
`` MASTER Desnoyers has gone out , '' Argensola would invariably say upon receiving her . 
And , thereupon she would burst into tears and threats , longing to kill herself then and there that her corpse might frighten away those other women who would come to rob her of what she considered her special privilege . 
Now it was Argensola who sped his companion to the street when he wished to be alone . 
He had only to remark casually , `` I believe that Yankee is coming , '' and the great man would beat a hasty retreat , oftentimes in his desperate flight availing himself of the back stairs . 
At this time began to develop the most important event in Julio 's existence . 
The Desnoyers family was to be united with that of Senator Lacour . 
Rene , his only son , had succeeded in awakening in Chichi a certain interest that was almost love . 
The dignitary enjoyed thinking of his son allied to the boundless plains and immense herds whose description always affected him like a marvellous tale . 
He was a widower , but he enjoyed giving at his home famous banquets and parties . 
Every new celebrity immediately suggested to him the idea of giving a dinner . 
No illustrious person passing through Paris , polar explorer or famous singer , could escape being exhibited in the dining room of Lacour . 
The son of Desnoyers -- at whom he had scarcely glanced before -- now inspired him with sudden interest . 
The senator was a thoroughly up-to-date man who did not classify glory nor distinguish reputations . 
It was enough for him that a name should be on everybody 's lips for him to accept it with enthusiasm . 
When Julio responded to his invitation , he presented him with pride to his friends , and came very near to calling him `` dear master . '' 
The tango was monopolizing all conversation nowadays . 
Even in the Academy they were taking it up in order to demonstrate that the youth of ancient Athens had diverted itself in a somewhat similar way ... . 
And Lacour had dreamed all his life of an Athenian republic . 
At these reunions , Desnoyers became acquainted with the Lauriers . 
He was an engineer who owned a motor-factory for automobiles in the outskirts of Paris -- a man about thirty-five , tall , rather heavy and silent , with a deliberate air as though he wished to see deeply into men and things . 
She was of a light , frivolous character , loving life for the satisfactions and pleasures which it brought her , appearing to accept with smiling conformity the silent and grave adoration of her husband . 
She could not well do less with a man of his merits . 
Besides , she had brought to the marriage a dowry of three hundred thousand francs , a capital which had enabled the engineer to enlarge his business . 
The senator had been instrumental in arranging this marriage . 
He was interested in Laurier because he was the son of an old friend . 
Upon Marguerite Laurier the presence of Julio flashed like a ray of sunlight in the tiresome salon of Lacour . 
She was dancing the fad of the hour and frequenting the tango teas where reigned the adored Desnoyers . 
And to think that she was being entertained with this celebrated and interesting man that the other women were raving about ! 
... In order that he might not take her for a mere middle-class woman like the other guests at the senator 's party , she spoke of her modistes , all from the rue de la Paix , declaring gravely that no woman who had any self-respect could possibly walk through the streets wearing a gown costing less than eight hundred francs , and that the hat of a thousand francs -- but a few years ago , an astonishing novelty -- was nowadays a very ordinary affair . 
This acquaintanceship made the `` little Laurier , '' as her friends called her notwithstanding her tallness , much sought by the master of the dance , in spite of the looks of wrath and envy hurled at her by the others . 
What a triumph for the wife of a simple engineer who was used to going everywhere in her mother 's automobile ! 
... Julio at first had supposed her like all the others who were languishing in his arms , following the rhythmic complications of the dance , but he soon found that she was very different . 
Her coquetry after the first confidential words , but increased his admiration . 
He really had never before been thrown with a woman of her class . 
Those of his first social period were the habituees of the night restaurants paid for their witchery . 
Now Glory was tossing into his arms ladies of high position but with an unconfessable past , anxious for novelties although exceedingly mature . 
This middle class woman who would advance so confidently toward him and then retreat with such capricious outbursts of modesty , was a new type for him . 
The tango salons soon began to suffer a great loss . 
Desnoyers was permitting himself to be seen there with less frequency , handing Glory over to the professionals . 
Sometimes entire weeks slipped by without the five-to-seven devotees being able to admire his black locks and his tiny patent leathers twinkling under the lights in time with his graceful movements . 
Marguerite was also avoiding these places . 
The meetings of the two were taking place in accordance with what she had read in the love stories of Paris . 
She was going in search of Julio , fearing to be recognized , tremulous with emotion , selecting her most inconspicuous suit , and covering her face with a close veil -- `` the veil of adultery , '' as her friends called it . 
They had their trysts in the least-frequented squares of the district , frequently changing the places , like timid birds that at the slightest disturbance fly to perch a little further away . 
Sometimes they would meet in the Buttes Chaumont , at others they preferred the gardens on the left bank of the Seine , the Luxembourg , and even the distant Parc de Montsouris . 
She was always in tremors of terror lest her husband might surprise them , although she well knew that the industrious engineer was in his factory a great distance away . 
Her agitated aspect , her excessive precautions in order to slip by unseen , only served to attract the attention of the passers-by . 
Although Julio was waxing impatient with the annoyance of this wandering love affair which only amounted to a few fugitive kisses , he finally held his peace , dominated by Marguerite 's pleadings . 
She did not wish merely to be one in the procession of his sweethearts ; it was necessary to convince herself first that this love was going to last forever . 
It was her first slip and she wanted it to be the last . 
Ay , her former spotless reputation ! 
... What would people say ! 
... The two returned to their adolescent period , loving each other as they had never loved before , with the confident and childish passion of fifteen-year-olds . 
Julio had leaped from childhood to libertinism , taking his initiation into life at a single bound . 
She had desired marriage in order to acquire the respect and liberty of a married woman , but feeling towards her husband only a vague gratitude . 
`` We end where others begin , '' she had said to Desnoyers . 
Their passion took the form of an intense , reciprocal and vulgar love . 
They felt a romantic sentimentality in clasping hands or exchanging kisses on a garden bench in the twilight . 
He was treasuring a ringlet of Marguerite 's -- although he doubted its genuineness , with a vague suspicion that it might be one of the latest wisps of fashion . 
She would cuddle down with her head on his shoulder , as though imploring his protection , although always in the open air . 
If Julio ever attempted greater intimacy in a carriage , madame would repel him most vigorously . 
A contradictory duality appeared to inspire her actions . 
Every morning , on awaking , she would decide to yield , but then when near him , her middle-class respectability , jealous of its reputation , kept her faithful to her mother 's teachings . 
One day she agreed to visit his studio with the interest that the haunts of the loved one always inspires . 
`` Promise that you will not take advantage of me . '' 
He readily promised , swearing that everything should be as Marguerite wished ... . 
But from that day they were no longer seen in the gardens , nor wandering around persecuted by the winter winds . 
They preferred the studio , and Argensola had to rearrange his existence , seeking the stove of another artist friend , in order to continue his reading . 
This state of things lasted two months . 
They never knew what secret force suddenly disturbed their tranquility . 
Perhaps one of her friends , guessing at the truth , had told the husband anonymously . 
Perhaps it was she herself unconsciously , with her inexpressible happiness , her tardy returns home when dinner was already served , and the sudden aversion which she showed toward the engineer in their hours alone , trying to keep her heart faithful to her lover . 
To divide her interest between her legal companion and the man she loved was a torment that her simple and vehement enthusiasm could not tolerate . 
While she was hurrying one night through the rue de la Pompe , looking at her watch and trembling with impatience at not finding an automobile or even a cab , a man stood in front of her ... . 
Etienne Laurier ! 
She always shuddered with fear on recalling that hour . 
For a moment she believed that he was going to kill her . 
Serious men , quiet and diffident , are most terrible in their explosions of wrath . 
Her husband knew everything . 
With the same patience that he employed in solving his industrial problems , he had been studying her day by day , without her ever suspecting the watchfulness behind that impassive countenance . 
Then he had followed her in order to complete the evidence of his misfortune . 
Marguerite had never supposed that he could be so common and noisy in his anger . 
She had expected that he would accept the facts coldly with that slight tinge of philosophical irony usually shown by distinguished men , as the husbands of her friends had done . 
But the poor engineer who , outside of his work , saw only his wife , loving her as a woman , and adoring her as a dainty and superior being , a model of grace and elegance , could not endure the thought of her downfall , and cried and threatened without reserve , so that the scandal became known throughout their entire circle of friends . 
The senator felt greatly annoyed in remembering that it was in his exclusive home that the guilty ones had become acquainted ; but his displeasure was visited upon the husband . 
What lack of good taste ! 
... Women will be women , and everything is capable of adjustment . 
But before the imprudent outbursts of this frantic devil no elegant solution was possible , and there was now nothing to do but to begin divorce proceedings . 
Desnoyers , senior , was very indignant upon learning of this last escapade of his son . 
He had always had a great liking for Laurier . 
That instinctive bond which exists between men of industry , patient and silent , had made them very congenial . 
At the senator 's receptions he had always talked with the engineer about the progress of his business , interesting himself in the development of that factory of which he always spoke with the affection of a father . 
The millionaire , in spite of his reputation for miserliness , had even volunteered his disinterested support if at any time it should become necessary to enlarge the plant . 
And it was this good man 's happiness that his son , a frivolous and useless dancer , was going to steal ! 
... At first Laurier spoke of a duel . 
His wrath was that of a work horse who breaks the tight reins of his laboring outfit , tosses his mane , neighs wildly and bites . 
The father was greatly distressed at the possibility of such an outcome ... . 
One scandal more ! 
Julio had dedicated the greater part of his existence to the handling of arms . 
`` He will kill the poor man ! '' 
he said to the senator . 
`` I am sure that he will kill him . 
It is the logic of life ; the good-for-nothing always kill those who amount to anything . '' 
But there was no killing . 
The Father of the Republic knew how to handle the clashing parties , with the same skill that he always employed in the corridors of the Senate during a ministerial crisis . 
The scandal was hushed up . 
Marguerite went to live with her mother and took the first steps for a divorce . 
