We do not so much believe something as believe someone who promises us or assures us of this or the other thing . 
We believe in a person and in God in so far as He is a person and a personalization of the Universe . 
This personal or religious element in faith is evident . 
Faith , it is said , is in itself neither theoretical knowledge nor rational adhesion to a truth , nor yet is its essence sufficiently explained by defining it as trust in God . 
Seeberg says of faith that it is `` the inward submission to the spiritual authority of God , immediate obedience . 
And in so far as this obedience is the means of attaining a rational principle , faith is a personal conviction . '' 
-LSB- 44 -RSB- The faith which St. Paul defined , pistis in Greek , is better translated as trust , confidence . 
The word pistis is derived from the verb peithô , which in its active voice means to persuade and in its middle voice to trust in someone , to esteem him as worthy of trust , to place confidence in him , to obey . 
And fidare se , to trust , is derived from the root fid -- whence fides , faith , and also confidence . 
The Greek root pith and the Latin fid are twin brothers . 
In the root of the word `` faith '' itself , therefore , there is implicit the idea of confidence , of surrender to the will of another , to a person . 
Confidence is placed only in persons . 
We trust in Providence , which we conceive as something personal and conscious , not in Fate , which is something impersonal . 
And thus it is in the person who tells us the truth , in the person who gives us hope , that we believe , not directly and immediately in truth itself or in hope itself . 
And this personal or rather personifying element in faith extends even to the lowest forms of it , for it is this that produces faith in pseudo-revelation , in inspiration , in miracle . 
There is a story of a Parisian doctor , who , when he found that a quack-healer was drawing away his clientèle , removed to a quarter of the city as distant as possible from his former abode , where he was totally unknown , and here he gave himself out as a quack-healer and conducted himself as such . 
When he was denounced as an illegal practitioner he produced his doctor 's certificate , and explained his action more or less as follows : `` I am indeed a doctor , but if I had announced myself as such I should not have had as large a clientèle as I have as a quack-healer . 
Now that all my clients know that I have studied medicine , however , and that I am a properly qualified medical man , they will desert me in favour of some quack who can assure them that he has never studied , but cures simply by inspiration . '' 
And true it is that a doctor is discredited when it is proved that he has never studied medicine and possesses no qualifying certificate , and that a quack is discredited when it is proved that he has studied and is a qualified practitioner . 
For some believe in science and in study , while others believe in the person , in inspiration , and even in ignorance . 
`` There is one distinction in the world 's geography which comes immediately to our minds when we thus state the different thoughts and desires of men concerning their religion . 
We remember how the whole world is in general divided into two hemispheres upon this matter . 
One half of the world -- the great dim East -- is mystic . 
It insists upon not seeing anything too clearly . 
Make any one of the great ideas of life distinct and clear , and immediately it seems to the Oriental to be untrue . 
He has an instinct which tells him that the vastest thoughts are too vast for the human mind , and that if they are made to present themselves in forms of statement which the human mind can comprehend , their nature is violated and their strength is lost . 
`` On the other hand , the Occidental , the man of the West , demands clearness and is impatient with mystery . 
He loves a definite statement as much as his brother of the East dislikes it . 
He insists on knowing what the eternal and infinite forces mean to his personal life , how they will make him personally happier and better , almost how they will build the house over his head , and cook the dinner on his hearth . 
This is the difference between the East and the West , between man on the banks of the Ganges and man on the banks of the Mississippi . 
Plenty of exceptions , of course , there are -- mystics in Boston and St. Louis , hard-headed men of facts in Bombay and Calcutta . 
The two great dispositions can not be shut off from one another by an ocean or a range of mountains . 
In some nations and places -- as , for instance , among the Jews and in our own New England -- they notably commingle . 
But in general they thus divide the world between them . 
The East lives in the moonlight of mystery , the West in the sunlight of scientific fact . 
The East cries out to the Eternal for vague impulses . 
The West seizes the present with light hands , and will not let it go till it has furnished it with reasonable , intelligible motives . 
Each misunderstands , distrusts , and in large degree despises the other . 
But the two hemispheres together , and not either one by itself , make up the total world . '' 
Thus , in one of his sermons , spoke the great Unitarian preacher Phillips Brooks , late Bishop of Massachusetts -LRB- The Mystery of Iniquity and Other Sermons , sermon xvi . -RRB- . 
We might rather say that throughout the whole world , in the East as well as in the West , rationalists seek definition and believe in the concept , while vitalists seek inspiration and believe in the person . 
The former scrutinize the Universe in order that they may wrest its secrets from it ; the latter pray to the Consciousness of the Universe , strive to place themselves in immediate relationship with the Soul of the World , with God , in order that they may find the guarantee or substance of what they hope for , which is not to die , and the evidence of what they do not see . 
And since a person is a will , and will always has reference to the future , he who believes , believes in what is to come -- that is , in what he hopes for . 
We do not believe , strictly speaking , in what is or in what was , except as the guarantee , as the substance , of what will be . 
For the Christian , to believe in the resurrection of Christ -- that is to say , in tradition and in the Gospel , which assure him that Christ has risen , both of them personal forces -- is to believe that he himself will one day rise again by the grace of Christ . 
And even scientific faith -- for such there is -- refers to the future and is an act of trust . 
The man of science believes that at a certain future date an eclipse of the sun will take place ; he believes that the laws which have governed the world hitherto will continue to govern it . 
To believe , I repeat , is to place confidence in someone , and it has reference to a person . 
I say that I know that there is an animal called the horse , and that it has such and such characteristics , because I have seen it ; and I say that I believe in the existence of the giraffe or the ornithorhyncus , and that it possesses such and such qualities , because I believe those who assure me that they have seen it . 
And hence the element of uncertainty attached to faith , for it is possible that a person may be deceived or that he may deceive us . 
But , on the other hand , this personal element in belief gives it an effective and loving character , and above all , in religious faith , a reference to what is hoped for . 
Perhaps there is nobody who would sacrifice his life for the sake of maintaining that the three angles of a triangle are together equal to two right angles , for such a truth does not demand the sacrifice of our life ; but , on the other hand , there are many who have lost their lives for the sake of maintaining their religious faith . 
Indeed it is truer to say that martyrs make faith than that faith makes martyrs . 
For faith is not the mere adherence of the intellect to an abstract principle ; it is not the recognition of a theoretical truth , a process in which the will merely sets in motion our faculty of comprehension ; faith is an act of the will -- it is a movement of the soul towards a practical truth , towards a person , towards something that makes us not merely comprehend life , but that makes us live . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- Faith makes us live by showing us that life , although it is dependent upon reason , has its well-spring and source of power elsewhere , in something supernatural and miraculous . 
Cournot the mathematician , a man of singularly well-balanced and scientifically equipped mind , has said that it is this tendency towards the supernatural and miraculous that gives life , and that when it is lacking , all the speculations of the reason lead to nothing but affliction of spirit -LRB- Traité de l'enchaînement des idées fondamentales dans les sciences et dans l'histoire , § 329 -RRB- . 
And in truth we wish to live . 
But , although we have said that faith is a thing of the will , it would perhaps be better to say that it is will itself -- the will not to die , or , rather , that it is some other psychic force distinct from intelligence , will , and feeling . 
We should thus have feeling , knowing , willing , and believing or creating . 
For neither feeling , nor intelligence , nor will creates ; they operate upon a material already given , upon the material given them by faith . 
Faith is the creative power in man . 
But since it has a more intimate relation with the will than with any other of his faculties , we conceive it under the form of volition . 
It should be borne in mind , however , that wishing to believe -- that is to say , wishing to create -- is not precisely the same as believing or creating , although it is its starting-point . 
Faith , therefore , if not a creative force , is the fruit of the will , and its function is to create . 
Faith , in a certain sense , creates its object . 
And faith in God consists in creating God ; and since it is God who gives us faith in Himself , it is God who is continually creating Himself in us . 
Therefore St. Augustine said : `` I will seek Thee , Lord , by calling upon Thee , and I will call upon Thee by believing in Thee . 
My faith calls upon Thee , Lord , the faith which Thou hast given me , with which Thou hast inspired me through the Humanity of Thy Son , through the ministry of Thy preacher '' -LRB- Confessions , book i. , chap . 
i. -RRB- . 
The power of creating God in our own image and likeness , of personalizing the Universe , simply means that we carry God within us , as the substance of what we hope for , and that God is continually creating us in His own image and likeness . 
And we create God -- that is to say , God creates Himself in us -- by compassion , by love . 
To believe in God is to love Him , and in our love to fear Him ; and we begin by loving Him even before knowing Him , and by loving Him we come at last to see and discover Him in all things . 
Those who say that they believe in God and yet neither love nor fear Him , do not in fact believe in Him but in those who have taught them that God exists , and these in their turn often enough do not believe in Him either . 
Those who believe that they believe in God , but without any passion in their heart , without anguish of mind , without uncertainty , without doubt , without an element of despair even in their consolation , believe only in the God-Idea , not in God Himself . 
And just as belief in God is born of love , so also it may be born of fear , and even of hate , and of such kind was the belief of Vanni Fucci , the thief , whom Dante depicts insulting God with obscene gestures in Hell -LRB- Inf . 
, xxv. , 1-3 -RRB- . 
For the devils also believe in God , and not a few atheists . 
Is it not perhaps a mode of believing in God , this fury with which those deny and even insult Him , who , because they can not bring themselves to believe in Him , wish that He may not exist ? 
Like those who believe , they , too , wish that God may exist ; but being men of a weak and passive or of an evil disposition , in whom reason is stronger than will , they feel themselves caught in the grip of reason and haled along in their own despite , and they fall into despair , and because of their despair they deny , and in their denial they affirm and create the thing that they deny , and God reveals Himself in them , affirming Himself by their very denial of Him . 
But it will be objected to all this that to demonstrate that faith creates its own object is to demonstrate that this object is an object for faith alone , that outside faith it has no objective reality ; just as , on the other hand , to maintain that faith is necessary because it affords consolation to the masses of the people , or imposes a wholesome restraint upon them , is to declare that the object of faith is illusory . 
What is certain is that for thinking believers to-day , faith is , before all and above all , wishing that God may exist . 
Wishing that God may exist , and acting and feeling as if He did exist . 
And desiring God 's existence and acting conformably with this desire , is the means whereby we create God -- that is , whereby God creates Himself in us , manifests Himself to us , opens and reveals Himself to us . 
For God goes out to meet him who seeks Him with love and by love , and hides Himself from him who searches for Him with the cold and loveless reason . 
God wills that the heart should have rest , but not the head , reversing the order of the physical life in which the head sleeps and rests at times while the heart wakes and works unceasingly . 
And thus knowledge without love leads us away from God ; and love , even without knowledge , and perhaps better without it , leads us to God , and through God to wisdom . 
Blessed are the pure in heart , for they shall see God ! 
And if you should ask me how I believe in God -- that is to say , how God creates Himself in me and reveals Himself to me -- my answer may , perhaps , provoke your smiles or your laughter , or it may even scandalize you . 
I believe in God as I believe in my friends , because I feel the breath of His affection , feel His invisible and intangible hand , drawing me , leading me , grasping me ; because I possess an inner consciousness of a particular providence and of a universal mind that marks out for me the course of my own destiny . 
And the concept of law -- it is nothing but a concept after all ! 
-- tells me nothing and teaches me nothing . 
Once and again in my life I have seen myself suspended in a trance over the abyss ; once and again I have found myself at the cross-roads , confronted by a choice of ways and aware that in choosing one I should be renouncing all the others -- for there is no turning back upon these roads of life ; and once and again in such unique moments as these I have felt the impulse of a mighty power , conscious , sovereign , and loving . 
And then , before the feet of the wayfarer , opens out the way of the Lord . 
It is possible for a man to feel the Universe calling to him and guiding him as one person guides and calls to another , to hear within him its voice speaking without words and saying : `` Go and preach to all peoples ! '' 
How do you know that the man you see before you possesses a consciousness like you , and that an animal also possesses such a consciousness , more or less dimly , but not a stone ? 
Because the man acts towards you like a man , like a being made in your likeness , and because the stone does not act towards you at all , but suffers you to act upon it . 
And in the same way I believe that the Universe possesses a certain consciousness like myself , because its action towards me is a human action , and I feel that it is a personality that environs me . 
Here is a formless mass ; it appears to be a kind of animal ; it is impossible to distinguish its members ; I only see two eyes , eyes which gaze at me with a human gaze , the gaze of a fellow-being , a gaze which asks for pity ; and I hear it breathing . 
I conclude that in this formless mass there is a consciousness . 
In just such a way and none other , the starry-eyed heavens gaze down upon the believer , with a superhuman , a divine , gaze , a gaze that asks for supreme pity and supreme love , and in the serenity of the night he hears the breathing of God , and God touches him in his heart of hearts and reveals Himself to him . 
It is the Universe , living , suffering , loving , and asking for love . 
From loving little trifling material things , which lightly come and lightly go , having no deep root in our affections , we come to love the more lasting things , the things which our hands can not grasp ; from loving goods we come to love the Good ; from loving beautiful things we come to love Beauty ; from loving the true we come to love the Truth ; from loving pleasures we come to love Happiness ; and , last of all , we come to love Love . 
We emerge from ourselves in order to penetrate further into our supreme I ; individual consciousness emerges from us in order to submerge itself in the total Consciousness of which we form a part , but without being dissolved in it . 
And God is simply the Love that springs from universal suffering and becomes consciousness . 
But this , it will be said , is merely to revolve in an iron ring , for such a God is not objective . 
And at this point it may not be out of place to give reason its due and to examine exactly what is meant by a thing existing , being objective . 
What is it , in effect , to exist ? 
and when do we say that a thing exists ? 
A thing exists when it is placed outside us , and in such a way that it shall have preceded our perception of it and be capable of continuing to subsist outside us after we have disappeared . 
But have I any certainty that anything has preceded me or that anything must survive me ? 
Can my consciousness know that there is anything outside it ? 
Everything that I know or can know is within my consciousness . 
We will not entangle ourselves , therefore , in the insoluble problem of an objectivity outside our perceptions . 
Things exist in so far as they act . 
To exist is to act . 
But now it will be said that it is not God , but the idea of God , that acts in us . 
To which we shall reply that it is sometimes God acting by His idea , but still very often it is rather God acting in us by Himself . 
And the retort will be a demand for proofs of the objective truth of the existence of God , since we ask for signs . 
And we shall have to answer with Pilate : What is truth ? 
And having asked this question , Pilate turned away without waiting for an answer and proceeded to wash his hands in order that he might exculpate himself for having allowed Christ to be condemned to death . 
And there are many who ask this question , What is truth ? 
but without any intention of waiting for the answer , and solely in order that they may turn away and wash their hands of the crime of having helped to kill and eject God from their own consciousness or from the consciousness of others . 
What is truth ? 
There are two kinds of truth -- the logical or objective , the opposite of which is error , and the moral or subjective , the opposite of which is falsehood . 
And in a previous essay I have endeavoured to show that error is the fruit of falsehood . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Moral truth , the road that leads to intellectual truth , which also is moral , inculcates the study of science , which is over and above all a school of sincerity and humility . 
Science teaches us , in effect , to submit our reason to the truth and to know and judge of things as they are -- that is to say , as they themselves choose to be and not as we would have them be . 
In a religiously scientific investigation , it is the data of reality themselves , it is the perceptions which we receive from the outside world , that formulate themselves in our mind as laws -- it is not we ourselves who thus formulate them . 
It is the numbers themselves which in our mind create mathematics . 
Science is the most intimate school of resignation and humility , for it teaches us to bow before the seemingly most insignificant of facts . 
And it is the gateway of religion ; but within the temple itself its function ceases . 
And just as there is logical truth , opposed to error , and moral truth , opposed to falsehood , so there is also esthetic truth or verisimilitude , which is opposed to extravagance , and religious truth or hope , which is opposed to the inquietude of absolute despair . 
For esthetic verisimilitude , the expression of which is sensible , differs from logical truth , the demonstration of which is rational ; and religious truth , the truth of faith , the substance of things hoped for , is not equivalent to moral truth , but superimposes itself upon it . 
He who affirms a faith built upon a basis of uncertainty does not and can not lie . 
And not only do we not believe with reason , nor yet above reason nor below reason , but we believe against reason . 
Religious faith , it must be repeated yet again , is not only irrational , it is contra-rational . 
Kierkegaard says : `` Poetry is illusion before knowledge ; religion illusion after knowledge . 
Between poetry and religion the worldly wisdom of living plays its comedy . 
Every individual who does not live either poetically or religiously is a fool '' -LRB- Afsluttende uvidenskabelig Efterskrift , chap . 
iv. , sect . 
2a , § 2 -RRB- . 
The same writer tells us that Christianity is a desperate sortie -LRB- salida -RRB- . 
Even so , but it is only by the very desperateness of this sortie that we can win through to hope , to that hope whose vitalizing illusion is of more force than all rational knowledge , and which assures us that there is always something that can not be reduced to reason . 
And of reason the same may be said as was said of Christ : that he who is not with it is against it . 
That which is not rational is contra-rational ; and such is hope . 
By this circuitous route we always arrive at hope in the end . 
To the mystery of love , which is the mystery of suffering , belongs a mysterious form , and this form is time . 
We join yesterday to to-morrow with links of longing , and the now is , strictly , nothing but the endeavour of the before to make itself the after ; the present is simply the determination of the past to become the future . 
The now is a point which , if not sharply articulated , vanishes ; and , nevertheless , in this point is all eternity , the substance of time . 
Everything that has been can be only as it was , and everything that is can be only as it is ; the possible is always relegated to the future , the sole domain of liberty , wherein imagination , the creative and liberating energy , the incarnation of faith , has space to roam at large . 
Love ever looks and tends to the future , for its work is the work of our perpetuation ; the property of love is to hope , and only upon hopes does it nourish itself . 
And thus when love sees the fruition of its desire it becomes sad , for it then discovers that what it desired was not its true end , and that God gave it this desire merely as a lure to spur it to action ; it discovers that its end is further on , and it sets out again upon its toilsome pilgrimage through life , revolving through a constant cycle of illusions and disillusions . 
And continually it transforms its frustrated hopes into memories , and from these memories it draws fresh hopes . 
From the subterranean ore of memory we extract the jewelled visions of our future ; imagination shapes our remembrances into hopes . 
And humanity is like a young girl full of longings , hungering for life and thirsting for love , who weaves her days with dreams , and hopes , hopes ever , hopes without ceasing , for the eternal and predestined lover , for him who , because he was destined for her from the beginning , from before the dawn of her remotest memory , from before her cradle-days , shall live with her and for her into the illimitable future , beyond the stretch of her furthest hopes , beyond the grave itself . 
And for this poor lovelorn humanity , as for the girl ever awaiting her lover , there is no kinder wish than that when the winter of life shall come it may find the sweet dreams of its spring changed into memories sweeter still , and memories that shall burgeon into new hopes . 
In the days when our summer is over , what a flow of calm felicity , of resignation to destiny , must come from remembering hopes which have never been realized and which , because they have never been realized , preserve their pristine purity . 
Love hopes , hopes ever and never wearies of hoping ; and love of God , our faith in God , is , above all , hope in Him . 
For God dies not , and he who hopes in God shall live for ever . 
And our fundamental hope , the root and stem of all our hopes , is the hope of eternal life . 
And if faith is the substance of hope , hope in its turn is the form of faith . 
Until it gives us hope , our faith is a formless faith , vague , chaotic , potential ; it is but the possibility of believing , the longing to believe . 
But we must needs believe in something , and we believe in what we hope for , we believe in hope . 
We remember the past , we know the present , we only believe in the future . 
To believe what we have not seen is to believe what we shall see . 
Faith , then , I repeat once again , is faith in hope ; we believe what we hope for . 
Love makes us believe in God , in whom we hope and from whom we hope to receive life to come ; love makes us believe in that which the dream of hope creates for us . 
Faith is our longing for the eternal , for God ; and hope is God 's longing , the longing of the eternal , of the divine in us , which advances to meet our faith and uplifts us . 
Man aspires to God by faith and cries to Him : `` I believe -- give me , Lord , wherein to believe ! '' 
And God , the divinity in man , sends him hope in another life in order that he may believe in it . 
Hope is the reward of faith . 
Only he who believes truly hopes ; and only he who truly hopes believes . 
We only believe what we hope , and we only hope what we believe . 
It was hope that called God by the name of Father ; and this name , so comforting yet so mysterious , is still bestowed upon Him by hope . 
The father gave us life and gives bread wherewith to sustain it , and we ask the father to preserve our life for us . 
And if Christ was he who , with the fullest heart and purest mouth , named with the name of Father his Father and ours , if the noblest feeling of Christianity is the feeling of the Fatherhood of God , it is because in Christ the human race sublimated its hunger for eternity . 
It may perhaps be said that this longing of faith , that this hope , is more than anything else an esthetic feeling . 
Possibly the esthetic feeling enters into it , but without completely satisfying it . 
We seek in art an image of eternalization . 
If for a brief moment our spirit finds peace and rest and assuagement in the contemplation of the beautiful , even though it finds therein no real cure for its distress , it is because the beautiful is the revelation of the eternal , of the divine in things , and beauty but the perpetuation of momentaneity . 
Just as truth is the goal of rational knowledge , so beauty is the goal of hope , which is perhaps in its essence irrational . 
Nothing is lost , nothing wholly passes away , for in some way or another everything is perpetuated ; and everything , after passing through time , returns to eternity . 
The temporal world has its roots in eternity , and in eternity yesterday is united with to-day and to-morrow . 
The scenes of life pass before us as in a cinematograph show , but on the further side of time the film is one and indivisible . 
Physicists affirm that not a single particle of matter nor a single tremor of energy is lost , but that each is transformed and transmitted and persists . 
And can it be that any form , however fugitive it may be , is lost ? 
We must needs believe -- believe and hope ! 
-- that it is not , but that somewhere it remains archived and perpetuated , and that there is some mirror of eternity in which , without losing themselves in one another , all the images that pass through time are received . 
Every impression that reaches me remains stored up in my brain even though it may be so deep or so weak that it is buried in the depths of my subconsciousness ; but from these depths it animates my life ; and if the whole of my spirit , the total content of my soul , were to awake to full consciousness , all these dimly perceived and forgotten fugitive impressions would come to life again , including even those which I had never been aware of . 
I carry within me everything that has passed before me , and I perpetuate it with myself , and it may be that it all goes into my germs , and that all my ancestors live undiminished in me and will continue so to live , united with me , in my descendants . 
And perhaps I , the whole I , with all this universe of mine , enter into each one of my actions , or , at all events , that which is essential in me enters into them -- that which makes me myself , my individual essence . 
And how is this individual essence in each several thing -- that which makes it itself and not another -- revealed to us save as beauty ? 
What is the beauty of anything but its eternal essence , that which unites its past with its future , that element of it that rests and abides in the womb of eternity ? 
or , rather , what is it but the revelation of its divinity ? 
And this beauty , which is the root of eternity , is revealed to us by love ; it is the supreme revelation of the love of God and the token of our ultimate victory over time . 
It is love that reveals to us the eternal in us and in our neighbours . 
Is it the beautiful , the eternal , in things , that awakens and kindles our love for them , or is it our love for things that reveals to us the beautiful , the eternal , in them ? 
Is not beauty perhaps a creation of love , in the same way and in the same sense that the sensible world is a creation of the instinct of preservation and the supersensible world of that of perpetuation ? 
Is not beauty , and together with beauty eternity , a creation of love ? 
`` Though our outward man perish , '' says the Apostle , `` yet the inward man is renewed day by day '' -LRB- 2 Cor . 
iv . 
16 -RRB- . 
The man of passing appearances perishes and passes away with them ; the man of reality remains and grows . 
`` For our light affliction , which is but for a moment , worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory '' -LRB- ver . 
17 -RRB- . 
Our suffering causes us anguish , and this anguish , bursting because of its own fullness , seems to us consolation . 
`` While we look not at the things which are seen , but at the things which are not seen : for the things which are seen are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are eternal '' -LRB- ver . 
18 -RRB- . 
This suffering gives hope , which is the beautiful in life , the supreme beauty , or the supreme consolation . 
And since love is full of suffering , since love is compassion and pity , beauty springs from compassion and is simply the temporal consolation that compassion seeks . 
A tragic consolation ! 
And the supreme beauty is that of tragedy . 
The consciousness that everything passes away , that we ourselves pass away , and that everything that is ours and everything that environs us passes away , fills us with anguish , and this anguish itself reveals to us the consolation of that which does not pass away , of the eternal , of the beautiful . 
And this beauty thus revealed , this perpetuation of momentaneity , only realizes itself practically , only lives through the work of charity . 
Hope in action is charity , and beauty in action is goodness . 
* * * * * Charity , which eternalizes everything it loves , and in giving us the goodness of it brings to light its hidden beauty , has its root in the love of God , or , if you like , in charity towards God , in pity for God . 
Love , pity , personalizes everything , we have said ; in discovering the suffering in everything and in personalizing everything , it personalizes the Universe itself as well -- for the Universe also suffers -- and it discovers God to us . 
For God is revealed to us because He suffers and because we suffer ; because He suffers He demands our love , and because we suffer He gives us His love , and He covers our anguish with the eternal and infinite anguish . 
This was the scandal of Christianity among Jews and Greeks , among Pharisees and Stoics , and this , which was its scandal of old , the scandal of the Cross , is still its scandal to-day , and will continue to be so , even among Christians themselves -- the scandal of a God who becomes man in order that He may suffer and die and rise again , because He has suffered and died , the scandal of a God subject to suffering and death . 
And this truth that God suffers -- a truth that appals the mind of man -- is the revelation of the very heart of the Universe and of its mystery , the revelation that God revealed to us when He sent His Son in order that he might redeem us by suffering and dying . 
It was the revelation of the divine in suffering , for only that which suffers is divine . 
And men made a god of this Christ who suffered , and through him they discovered the eternal essence of a living , human God -- that is , of a God who suffers -- it is only the dead , the inhuman , that does not suffer -- a God who loves and thirsts for love , for pity , a God who is a person . 
Whosoever knows not the Son will never know the Father , and the Father is only known through the Son ; whosoever knows not the Son of Man -- he who suffers bloody anguish and the pangs of a breaking heart , whose soul is heavy within him even unto death , who suffers the pain that kills and brings to life again -- will never know the Father , and can know nothing of the suffering God . 
He who does not suffer , and who does not suffer because he does not live , is that logical and frozen ens realissimum , the primum movens , that impassive entity , which because of its impassivity is nothing but a pure idea . 
The category does not suffer , but neither does it live or exist as a person . 
And how is the world to derive its origin and life from an impassive idea ? 
Such a world would be but the idea of the world . 
But the world suffers , and suffering is the sense of the flesh of reality ; it is the spirit 's sense of its mass and substance ; it is the self 's sense of its own tangibility ; it is immediate reality . 
Suffering is the substance of life and the root of personality , for it is only suffering that makes us persons . 
And suffering is universal , suffering is that which unites all us living beings together ; it is the universal or divine blood that flows through us all . 
That which we call will , what is it but suffering ? 
And suffering has its degrees , according to the depth of its penetration , from the suffering that floats upon the sea of appearances to the eternal anguish , the source of the tragic sense of life , which seeks a habitation in the depths of the eternal and there awakens consolation ; from the physical suffering that contorts our bodies to the religious anguish that flings us upon the bosom of God , there to be watered by the divine tears . 
Anguish is something far deeper , more intimate , and more spiritual than suffering . 
We are wont to feel the touch of anguish even in the midst of that which we call happiness , and even because of this happiness itself , to which we can not resign ourselves and before which we tremble . 
The happy who resign themselves to their apparent happiness , to a transitory happiness , seem to be as men without substance , or , at any rate , men who have not discovered this substance in themselves , who have not touched it . 
Such men are usually incapable of loving or of being loved , and they go through life without really knowing either pain or bliss . 
There is no true love save in suffering , and in this world we have to choose either love , which is suffering , or happiness . 
And love leads us to no other happiness than that of love itself and its tragic consolation of uncertain hope . 
The moment love becomes happy and satisfied , it no longer desires and it is no longer love . 
The satisfied , the happy , do not love ; they fall asleep in habit , near neighbour to annihilation . 
To fall into a habit is to begin to cease to be . 
Man is the more man -- that is , the more divine -- the greater his capacity for suffering , or , rather , for anguish . 
At our coming into the world it is given to us to choose between love and happiness , and we wish -- poor fools ! 
-- for both : the happiness of loving and the love of happiness . 
But we ought to ask for the gift of love and not of happiness , and to be preserved from dozing away into habit , lest we should fall into a fast sleep , a sleep without waking , and so lose our consciousness beyond power of recovery . 
We ought to ask God to make us conscious of ourselves in ourselves , in our suffering . 
What is Fate , what is Fatality , but the brotherhood of love and suffering ? 
What is it but that terrible mystery in virtue of which love dies as soon as it touches the happiness towards which it reaches out , and true happiness dies with it ? 
Love and suffering mutually engender one another , and love is charity and compassion , and the love that is not charitable and compassionate is not love . 
Love , in a word , is resigned despair . 
That which the mathematicians call the problem of maxima and minima , which is also called the law of economy , is the formula for all existential -- that is , passional -- activity . 
In material mechanics and in social mechanics , in industry and in political economy , every problem resolves itself into an attempt to obtain the greatest possible resulting utility with the least possible effort , the greatest income with the least expenditure , the most pleasure with the least pain . 
And the terrible and tragic formula of the inner , spiritual life is either to obtain the most happiness with the least love , or the most love with the least happiness . 
And it is necessary to choose between the one and the other , and to know that he who approaches the infinite of love , the love that is infinite , approaches the zero of happiness , the supreme anguish . 
And in reaching this zero he is beyond the reach of the misery that kills . 
`` Be not , and thou shalt be mightier than aught that is , '' said Brother Juan de los Angeles in one of his Diálogos de la conquista del reino de Dios -LRB- Dial . 
iii . 
8 -RRB- . 
And there is something still more anguishing than suffering . 
A man about to receive a much-dreaded blow expects to have to suffer so severely that he may even succumb to the suffering , and when the blow falls he feels scarcely any pain ; but afterwards , when he has come to himself and is conscious of his insensibility , he is seized with terror , a tragic terror , the most terrible of all , and choking with anguish he cries out : `` Can it be that I no longer exist ? '' 
Which would you find most appalling -- to feel such a pain as would deprive you of your senses on being pierced through with a white-hot iron , or to see yourself thus pierced through without feeling any pain ? 
Have you never felt the horrible terror of feeling yourself incapable of suffering and of tears ? 
Suffering tells us that we exist ; suffering tells us that those whom we love exist ; suffering tells us that the world in which we live exists ; and suffering tells us that God exists and suffers ; but it is the suffering of anguish , the anguish of surviving and being eternal . 
Anguish discovers God to us and makes us love Him . 
To believe in God is to love Him , and to love Him is to feel Him suffering , to pity Him . 
It may perhaps appear blasphemous to say that God suffers , for suffering implies limitation . 
Nevertheless , God , the Consciousness of the Universe , is limited by the brute matter in which He lives , by the unconscious , from which He seeks to liberate Himself and to liberate us . 
And we , in our turn , must seek to liberate Him . 
God suffers in each and all of us , in each and all of the consciousnesses imprisoned in transitory matter , and we all suffer in Him . 
Religious anguish is but the divine suffering , the feeling that God suffers in me and that I suffer in Him . 
The universal suffering is the anguish of all in seeking to be all else but without power to achieve it , the anguish of each in being he that he is , being at the same time all that he is not , and being so for ever . 
The essence of a being is not only its endeavour to persist for ever , as Spinoza taught us , but also its endeavour to universalize itself ; it is the hunger and thirst for eternity and infinity . 
Every created being tends not only to preserve itself in itself , but to perpetuate itself , and , moreover , to invade all other beings , to be others without ceasing to be itself , to extend its limits to the infinite , but without breaking them . 
It does not wish to throw down its walls and leave everything laid flat , common and undefended , confounding and losing its own individuality , but it wishes to carry its walls to the extreme limits of creation and to embrace everything within them . 
It seeks the maximum of individuality with the maximum also of personality ; it aspires to the identification of the Universe with itself ; it aspires to God . 
And this vast I , within which each individual I seeks to put the Universe -- what is it but God ? 
And because I aspire to God , I love Him ; and this aspiration of mine towards God is my love for Him , and just as I suffer in being He , He also suffers in being I , and in being each one of us . 
I am well aware that in spite of my warning that I am attempting here to give a logical form to a system of a-logical feelings , I shall be scandalizing not a few of my readers in speaking of a God who suffers , and in applying to God Himself , as God , the passion of Christ . 
The God of so-called rational theology excludes in effect all suffering . 
And the reader will no doubt think that this idea of suffering can have only a metaphorical value when applied to God , similar to that which is supposed to attach to those passages in the Old Testament which describe the human passions of the God of Israel . 
For anger , wrath , and vengeance are impossible without suffering . 
And as for saying that God suffers through being bound by matter , I shall be told that , in the words of Plotinus -LRB- Second Ennead , ix. , 7 -RRB- , the Universal Soul can not be bound by the very thing -- namely , bodies or matter -- which is bound by It . 
Herein is involved the whole problem of the origin of evil , the evil of sin no less than the evil of pain , for if God does not suffer , He causes suffering ; and if His life , since God lives , is not a process of realizing in Himself a total consciousness which is continually becoming fuller -- that is to say , which is continually becoming more and more God -- it is a process of drawing all things towards Himself , of imparting Himself to all , of constraining the consciousness of each part to enter into the consciousness of the All , which is He Himself , until at last He comes to be all in all -- panta en paot , according to the expression of St. Paul , the first Christian mystic . 
We will discuss this more fully , however , in the next chapter on the apocatastasis or beatific union . 
For the present let it suffice to say that there is a vast current of suffering urging living beings towards one another , constraining them to love one another and to seek one another , and to endeavour to complete one another , and to be each himself and others at the same time . 
In God everything lives , and in His suffering everything suffers , and in loving God we love His creatures in Him , just as in loving and pitying His creatures we love and pity God in them . 
No single soul can be free so long as there is anything enslaved in God 's world , neither can God Himself , who lives in the soul of each one of us , be free so long as our soul is not free . 
My most immediate sensation is the sense and love of my own misery , my anguish , the compassion I feel for myself , the love I bear for myself . 
And when this compassion is vital and superabundant , it overflows from me upon others , and from the excess of my own compassion I come to have compassion for my neighbours . 
My own misery is so great that the compassion for myself which it awakens within me soon overflows and reveals to me the universal misery . 
And what is charity but the overflow of pity ? 
What is it but reflected pity that overflows and pours itself out in a flood of pity for the woes of others and in the exercise of charity ? 
When the overplus of our pity leads us to the consciousness of God within us , it fills us with so great anguish for the misery shed abroad in all things , that we have to pour our pity abroad , and this we do in the form of charity . 
And in this pouring abroad of our pity we experience relief and the painful sweetness of goodness . 
This is what Teresa de Jesús , the mystical doctor , called `` sweet-tasting suffering '' -LRB- dolor sabroso -RRB- , and she knew also the lore of suffering loves . 
It is as when one looks upon some thing of beauty and feels the necessity of making others sharers in it . 
For the creative impulse , in which charity consists , is the work of suffering love . 
We feel , in effect , a satisfaction in doing good when good superabounds within us , when we are swollen with pity ; and we are swollen with pity when God , filling our soul , gives us the suffering sensation of universal life , of the universal longing for eternal divinization . 
For we are not merely placed side by side with others in the world , having no common root with them , neither is their lot indifferent to us , but their pain hurts us , their anguish fills us with anguish , and we feel our community of origin and of suffering even without knowing it . 
Suffering , and pity which is born of suffering , are what reveal to us the brotherhood of every existing thing that possesses life and more or less of consciousness . 
`` Brother Wolf '' St. Francis of Assisi called the poor wolf that feels a painful hunger for the sheep , and feels , too , perhaps , the pain of having to devour them ; and this brotherhood reveals to us the Fatherhood of God , reveals to us that God is a Father and that He exists . 
And as a Father He shelters our common misery . 
Charity , then , is the impulse to liberate myself and all my fellows from suffering , and to liberate God , who embraces us all . 
Suffering is a spiritual thing . 
It is the most immediate revelation of consciousness , and it may be that our body was given us simply in order that suffering might be enabled to manifest itself . 
A man who had never known suffering , either in greater or less degree , would scarcely possess consciousness of himself . 
The child first cries at birth when the air , entering into his lungs and limiting him , seems to say to him : You have to breathe me in order that you may live ! 
We must needs believe with faith , whatever counsels reason may give us , that the material or sensible world which the senses create for us exists solely in order to embody and sustain that other spiritual or imaginable world which the imagination creates for us . 
Consciousness tends to be ever more and more consciousness , to intensify its consciousness , to acquire full consciousness of its complete self , of the whole of its content . 
We must needs believe with faith , whatever counsels reason may give us , that in the depths of our own bodies , in animals , in plants , in rocks , in everything that lives , in all the Universe , there is a spirit that strives to know itself , to acquire consciousness of itself , to be itself -- for to be oneself is to know oneself -- to be pure spirit ; and since it can only achieve this by means of the body , by means of matter , it creates and makes use of matter at the same time that it remains the prisoner of it . 
The face can only see itself when portrayed in the mirror , but in order to see itself it must remain the prisoner of the mirror in which it sees itself , and the image which it sees therein is as the mirror distorts it ; and if the mirror breaks , the image is broken ; and if the mirror is blurred , the image is blurred . 
Spirit finds itself limited by the matter in which it has to live and acquire consciousness of itself , just as thought is limited by the word in which as a social medium it is incarnated . 
Without matter there is no spirit , but matter makes spirit suffer by limiting it . 
And suffering is simply the obstacle which matter opposes to spirit ; it is the clash of the conscious with the unconscious . 
Suffering is , in effect , the barrier which unconsciousness , matter , sets up against consciousness , spirit ; it is the resistance to will , the limit which the visible universe imposes upon God ; it is the wall that consciousness runs up against when it seeks to extend itself at the expense of unconsciousness ; it is the resistance which unconsciousness opposes to its penetration by consciousness . 
Although in deference to authority we may believe , we do not in fact know , that we possess heart , stomach , or lungs so long as they do not cause us discomfort , suffering , or anguish . 
Physical suffering , or even discomfort , is what reveals to us our own internal core . 
And the same is true of spiritual suffering and anguish , for we do not take account of the fact that we possess a soul until it hurts us . 
Anguish is that which makes consciousness return upon itself . 
He who knows no anguish knows what he does and what he thinks , but he does not truly know that he does it and that he thinks it . 
He thinks , but he does not think that he thinks , and his thoughts are as if they were not his . 
Neither does he properly belong to himself . 
For it is only anguish , it is only the passionate longing never to die , that makes a human spirit master of itself . 
Pain , which is a kind of dissolution , makes us discover our internal core ; and in the supreme dissolution , which is death , we shall , at last , through the pain of annihilation , arrive at the core of our temporal core -- at God , whom in our spiritual anguish we breathe and learn to love . 
Even so must we believe with faith , whatever counsels reason may give us . 
The origin of evil , as many discovered of old , is nothing other than what is called by another name the inertia of matter , and , as applied to the things of the spirit , sloth . 
And not without truth has it been said that sloth is the mother of all vices , not forgetting that the supreme sloth is that of not longing madly for immortality . 
Consciousness , the craving for more , more , always more , hunger of eternity and thirst of infinity , appetite for God -- these are never satisfied . 
Each consciousness seeks to be itself and to be all other consciousnesses without ceasing to be itself : it seeks to be God . 
And matter , unconsciousness , tends to be less and less , tends to be nothing , its thirst being a thirst for repose . 
Spirit says : I wish to be ! 
and matter answers : I wish not to be ! 
And in the order of human life , the individual would tend , under the sole instigation of the instinct of preservation , the creator of the material world , to destruction , to annihilation , if it were not for society , which , in implanting in him the instinct of perpetuation , the creator of the spiritual world , lifts and impels him towards the All , towards immortalization . 
And everything that man does as a mere individual , opposed to society , for the sake of his own preservation , and at the expense of society , if need be , is bad ; and everything that he does as a social person , for the sake of the society in which he himself is included , for the sake of its perpetuation and of the perpetuation of himself in it , is good . 
And many of those who seem to be the greatest egoists , trampling everything under their feet in their zeal to bring their work to a successful issue , are in reality men whose souls are aflame and overflowing with charity , for they subject and subordinate their petty personal I to the social I that has a mission to accomplish . 
He who would tie the working of love , of spiritualization , of liberation , to transitory and individual forms , crucifies God in matter ; he crucifies God who makes the ideal subservient to his own temporal interests or worldly glory . 
And such a one is a deicide . 
The work of charity , of the love of God , is to endeavour to liberate God from brute matter , to endeavour to give consciousness to everything , to spiritualize or universalize everything ; it is to dream that the very rocks may find a voice and work in accordance with the spirit of this dream ; it is to dream that everything that exists may become conscious , that the Word may become life . 
We have but to look at the eucharistic symbol to see an instance of it . 
The Word has been imprisoned in a piece of material bread , and it has been imprisoned therein to the end that we may eat it , and in eating it make it our own , part and parcel of our body in which the spirit dwells , and that it may beat in our heart and think in our brain and be consciousness . 
It has been imprisoned in this bread in order that , after being buried in our body , it may come to life again in our spirit . 
And we must spiritualize everything . 
And this we shall accomplish by giving our spirit , which grows the more the more it is distributed , to all men and to all things . 
And we give our spirit when we invade other spirits and make ourselves the master of them . 
All this is to be believed with faith , whatever counsels reason may give us . 
* * * * * And now we are about to see what practical consequences all these more or less fantastical doctrines may have in regard to logic , to esthetics , and , above all , to ethics -- their religious concretion , in a word . 
And perhaps then they will gain more justification in the eyes of the reader who , in spite of my warnings , has hitherto been looking for the scientific or even philosophic development of an irrational system . 
I think it may not be superfluous to recall to the reader once again what I said at the conclusion of the sixth chapter , that entitled `` In the Depths of the Abyss '' ; but we now approach the practical or pragmatical part of this treatise . 
First , however , we must see how the religious sense may become concrete in the hopeful vision of another life . 
Kai gar isôs kai malista prepei mellonta echeise apodêmein diaskopein te kai muthologein peri tês apodêmias tês echei , poian tina autên oiometha einai . 
-- PLATO : Phædo . 
Religion is founded upon faith , hope , and charity , which in their turn are founded upon the feeling of divinity and of God . 
Of faith in God is born our faith in men , of hope in God hope in men , and of charity or piety towards God -- for as Cicero said , -LSB- 47 -RSB- est enim pietas iustitia adversum deos -- charity towards men . 
In God is resumed not only Humanity , but the whole Universe , and the Universe spiritualized and penetrated with consciousness , for as the Christian Faith teaches , God shall at last be all in all . 
St. Teresa said , and Miguel de Molinos repeated with a harsher and more despairing inflection , that the soul must realize that nothing exists but itself and God . 
And this relation with God , this more or less intimate union with Him , is what we call religion . 
What is religion ? 
In what does it differ from the religious sense and how are the two related ? 
Every man 's definition of religion is based upon his own inward experience of it rather than upon his observation of it in others , nor indeed is it possible to define it without in some way or another experiencing it . 
Tacitus said -LRB- Hist . 
v. 4 -RRB- , speaking of the Jews , that they regarded as profane everything that the Romans held to be sacred , and that what was sacred to them was to the Romans impure : profana illic omnia quæ apud nos sacra , rursum conversa apud illos quæ nobis incesta . 
Therefore he , the Roman , describes the Jews as a people dominated by superstition and hostile to religion , gens superstitioni obnoxia , religionibus adversa , while as regards Christianity , with which he was very imperfectly acquainted , scarcely distinguishing it from Judaism , he deemed it to be a pernicious superstition , existialis superstitio , inspired by a hatred of mankind , odium generis humani -LRB- Ab excessu Aug. , xv. , 44 -RRB- . 
And there have been many others who have shared his opinion . 
But where does religion end and superstition begin , or perhaps rather we should say at what point does superstition merge into religion ? 
What is the criterion by means of which we discriminate between them ? 
It would be of little profit to recapitulate here , even summarily , the principal definitions , each bearing the impress of the personal feeling of its definer , which have been given of religion . 
Religion is better described than defined and better felt than described . 
But if there is any one definition that latterly has obtained acceptance , it is that of Schleiermacher , to the effect that religion consists in the simple feeling of a relationship of dependence upon something above us and a desire to establish relations with this mysterious power . 
Nor is there much amiss with the statement of W. Hermann -LSB- 48 -RSB- that the religious longing of man is a desire for truth concerning his human existence . 
And to cut short these extraneous citations , I will end with one from the judicious and perspicacious Cournot : `` Religious manifestations are the necessary consequence of man 's predisposition to believe in the existence of an invisible , supernatural and miraculous world , a predisposition which it has been possible to consider sometimes as a reminiscence of an anterior state , sometimes as an intimation of a future destiny '' -LRB- Traité de l'enchaînement des idées fondamentales dans les sciences et dans l'histoire , § 396 -RRB- . 
And it is this problem of human destiny , of eternal life , or of the human finality of the Universe or of God , that we have now reached . 
All the highways of religion lead up to this , for it is the very essence of all religion . 
Beginning with the savage 's personalization of the whole Universe in his fetich , religion has its roots in the vital necessity of giving human finality to the Universe , to God , and this necessity obliges it , therefore , to attribute to the Universe , to God , consciousness of self and of purpose . 
And it may be said that religion is simply union with God , each one interpreting God according to his own sense of Him . 
God gives transcendent meaning and finality to life ; but He gives it relatively to each one of us who believe in Him . 
And thus God is for man as much as man is for God , for God in becoming man , in becoming human , has given Himself to man because of His love of him . 
And this religious longing for union with God is a longing for a union that can not be consummated in science or in art , but only in life . 
`` He who possesses science and art , has religion ; he who possesses neither science nor art , let him get religion , '' said Goethe in one of his frequent accesses of paganism . 
And yet in spite of what he said , he himself , Goethe ... ? 
And to wish that we may be united with God is not to wish that we may be lost and submerged in Him , for this loss and submersion of self ends at last in the complete dissolution of self in the dreamless sleep of Nirvana ; it is to wish to possess Him rather than to be possessed by Him . 
When his disciples , amazed at his saying that it was impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven , asked Jesus who then could be saved , the Master replied that with men it was impossible but not with God ; and then said Peter , `` Behold , we have forsaken all and followed thee ; what shall we have therefore ? '' 
And the reply of Jesus was , not that they should be absorbed in the Father , but that they should sit upon twelve thrones , judging the twelve tribes of Israel -LRB- Matt . 
xix . 
23-26 -RRB- . 
It was a Spaniard , and very emphatically a Spaniard , Miguel de Molinos , who said in his Guía Espiritual -LSB- 49 -RSB- that `` he who would attain to the mystical science must abandon and be detached from five things : first , from creatures ; second , from temporal things ; third , from the very gifts of the Holy Spirit ; fourth , from himself ; and fifth , he must be detached even from God . '' 
And he adds that `` this last is the completest of all , because that soul only that knows how to be so detached is that which attains to being lost in God , and only the soul that attains to being so lost succeeds in finding itself . '' 
Emphatically a true Spaniard , Molinos , and truly Spanish is this paradoxical expression of quietism or rather of nihilism -- for he himself elsewhere speaks of annihilation -- and not less Spanish , nay , perhaps even more Spanish , were the Jesuits who attacked him , upholding the prerogatives of the All against the claims of Nothingness . 
For religion is not the longing for self-annihilation , but for self-completion , it is the longing not for death but for life . 
`` The eternal religion of the inward essence of man ... the individual dream of the heart , is the worship of his own being , the adoration of life , '' as the tortured soul of Flaubert was intimately aware -LRB- Par les champs et par les grèves , vii . -RRB- . 
When at the beginning of the so-called modern age , at the Renaissance , the pagan sense of religion came to life again , it took concrete form in the knightly ideal with its codes of love and honour . 
But it was a paganism Christianized , baptized . 
`` Woman -- la donna -- was the divinity enshrined within those savage breasts . 
Whosoever will investigate the memorials of primitive times will find this ideal of woman in its full force and purity ; the Universe is woman . 
And so it was in Germany , in France , in Provence , in Spain , in Italy , at the beginning of the modern age . 
History was cast in this mould ; Trojans and Romans were conceived as knights-errant , and so too were Arabs , Saracens , Turks , the Sultan and Saladin ... . 
In this universal fraternity mingle angels , saints , miracles and paradise , strangely blended with the fantasy and voluptuousness of the Oriental world , and all baptized in the name of Chivalry . '' 
Thus , in his Storia della Letteratura italiana , ii. , writes Francesco de Sanctis , and in an earlier passage he informs us that for that breed of men `` in paradise itself the lover 's delight was to look upon his lady -- Madonna -- and that he had no desire to go thither if he might not go in his lady 's company . '' 
What , in fact , was Chivalry -- which Cervantes , intending to kill it , afterwards purified and Christianized in Don Quixote -- but a real though distorted religion , a hybrid between paganism and Christianity , whose gospel perhaps was the legend of Tristan and Iseult ? 
And did not even the Christianity of the mystics -- those knights-errant of the spirit -- possibly reach its culminating-point in the worship of the divine woman , the Virgin Mary ? 
What else was the Mariolatry of a St. Bonaventura , the troubadour of Mary ? 
