And this sentiment found its inspiration in love of the fountain of life , of that which saves us from death . 
But as the Renaissance advanced men turned from the religion of woman to the religion of science ; desire , the foundation of which was curiosity , ended in curiosity , in eagerness to taste of the fruit of the tree of good and evil . 
Europe flocked to the University of Bologna in search of learning . 
Chivalry was succeeded by Platonism . 
Men sought to discover the mystery of the world and of life . 
But it was really in order to save life , which they had also sought to save in the worship of woman . 
Human consciousness sought to penetrate the Universal Consciousness , but its real object , whether it was aware of it or not , was to save itself . 
For the truth is that we feel and imagine the Universal Consciousness -- and in this feeling and imagination religious experience consists -- simply in order that thereby we may save our own individual consciousnesses . 
And how ? 
Once again I must repeat that the longing for the immortality of the soul , for the permanence , in some form or another , of our personal and individual consciousness , is as much of the essence of religion as is the longing that there may be a God . 
The one does not exist apart from the other , the reason being that fundamentally they are one and the same thing . 
But as soon as we attempt to give a concrete and rational form to this longing for immortality and permanence , to define it to ourselves , we encounter even more difficulties than we encountered in our attempt to rationalize God . 
The universal consent of mankind has again been invoked as a means of justifying this immortal longing for immortality to our own feeble reason . 
Permanere animos arbitratur consensu nationum omnium , said Cicero , echoing the opinion of the ancients -LRB- Tuscul . 
Quæst . 
, xvi. , 36 -RRB- . 
But this same recorder of his own feelings confessed that , although when he read the arguments in favour of the immortality of the soul in the Phædo of Plato he was compelled to assent to them , as soon as he put the book aside and began to revolve the problem in his own mind , all his previous assent melted away , assentio omnis illa illabitur -LRB- cap . 
xi. , 25 -RRB- . 
And what happened to Cicero happens to us all , and it happened likewise to Swedenborg , the most daring visionary of the other world . 
Swedenborg admitted that he who discourses of life after death , putting aside all erudite notions concerning the soul and its mode of union with the body , believes that after death he shall live in a glorious joy and vision , as a man among angels ; but when he begins to reflect upon the doctrine of the union of the soul with the body , or upon the hypothetical opinion concerning the soul , doubts arise in him as to whether the soul is thus or otherwise , and when these doubts arise , his former idea is dissipated -LRB- De cælo et inferno , § 183 -RRB- . 
Nevertheless , as Cournot says , `` it is the destiny that awaits me , me or my person , that moves , perturbs and consoles me , that makes me capable of abnegation and sacrifice , whatever be the origin , the nature or the essence of this inexplicable bond of union , in the absence of which the philosophers are pleased to determine that my person must disappear '' -LRB- Traité , etc. , § 297 -RRB- . 
Must we then embrace the pure and naked faith in an eternal life without trying to represent it to ourselves ? 
This is impossible ; it is beyond our power to bring ourselves or accustom ourselves to do so . 
And nevertheless there are some who call themselves Christians and yet leave almost altogether on one side this question of representation . 
Take any work of theology informed by the most enlightened -- that is , the most rationalistic and liberal -- Protestantism ; take , for instance , the Dogmatik of Dr. Julius Kaftan , and of the 668 pages of which the sixth edition , that of 1909 , consists , you will find only one , the last , that is devoted to this problem . 
And in this page , after affirming that Christ is not only the beginning and middle but also the end and consummation of History , and that those who are in Christ will attain to fullness of life , the eternal life of those who are in Christ , not a single word as to what that life may be . 
Half a dozen words at most about eternal death , that is , hell , `` for its existence is demanded by the moral character of faith and of Christian hope . '' 
Its moral character , eh ? 
not its religious character , for I am not aware that the latter knows any such exigency . 
And all this inspired by a prudent agnostic parsimony . 
Yes , the prudent , the rational , and , some will say , the pious , attitude , is not to seek to penetrate into mysteries that are hidden from our knowledge , not to insist upon shaping a plastic representation of eternal glory , such as that of the Divina Commedia . 
True faith , true Christian piety , we shall be told , consists in resting upon the confidence that God , by the grace of Christ , will , in some way or another , make us live in Him , in His Son ; that , as our destiny is in His almighty hands , we should surrender ourselves to Him , in the full assurance that He will do with us what is best for the ultimate end of life , of spirit and of the universe . 
Such is the teaching that has traversed many centuries , and was notably prominent in the period between Luther and Kant . 
And nevertheless men have not ceased endeavouring to imagine to themselves what this eternal life may be , nor will they cease their endeavours so long as they are men and not merely thinking machines . 
There are books of theology -- or of what passes for theology -- full of disquisitions upon the conditions under which the blessed dead live in paradise , upon their mode of enjoyment , upon the properties of the glorious body , for without some form of body the soul can not be conceived . 
And to this same necessity , the real necessity of forming to ourselves a concrete representation of what this other life may be , must in great part be referred the indestructible vitality of doctrines such as those of spiritualism , metempsychosis , the transmigration of souls from star to star , and the like ; doctrines which as often as they are pronounced to be defeated and dead , are found to have come to life again , clothed in some more or less new form . 
And it is merely supine to be content to ignore them and not to seek to discover their permanent and living essence . 
Man will never willingly abandon his attempt to form a concrete representation of the other life . 
But is an eternal and endless life after death indeed thinkable ? 
How can we conceive the life of a disembodied spirit ? 
How can we conceive such a spirit ? 
How can we conceive a pure consciousness , without a corporal organism ? 
Descartes divided the world into thought and extension , a dualism which was imposed upon him by the Christian dogma of the immortality of the soul . 
But is extension , is matter , that which thinks and is spiritualized , or is thought that which is extended and materialized ? 
The weightiest questions of metaphysics arise practically out of our desire to arrive at an understanding of the possibility of our immortality -- from this fact they derive their value and cease to be merely the idle discussions of fruitless curiosity . 
For the truth is that metaphysics has no value save in so far as it attempts to explain in what way our vital longing can or can not be realized . 
And thus it is that there is and always will be a rational metaphysic and a vital metaphysic , in perennial conflict with one another , the one setting out from the notion of cause , the other from the notion of substance . 
And even if we were to succeed in imagining personal immortality , might we not possibly feel it to be something no less terrible than its negation ? 
`` Calypso was inconsolable at the departure of Ulysses ; in her sorrow she was dismayed at being immortal , '' said the gentle , the mystical Fénelon at the beginning of his Télémaque . 
Was it not a kind of doom that the ancient gods , no less than the demons , were subject to -- the deprivation of the power to commit suicide ? 
When Jesus took Peter and James and John up into a high mountain and was transfigured before them , his raiment shining as white as snow , and Moses and Elias appeared and talked with him , Peter said to the Master : `` Master , it is good for us to be here ; and let us make three tabernacles ; one for thee and one for Moses and one for Elias , '' for he wished to eternalize that moment . 
And as they came down from the mountain , Jesus charged them that they should tell no man what they had seen until the Son of Man should have risen from the dead . 
And they , keeping this saying to themselves , questioned one with another what this rising from the dead should mean , as men not understanding the purport of it . 
And it was after this that Jesus met the father whose son was possessed with a dumb spirit and who cried out to him , `` Lord , I believe ; help thou mine unbelief '' -LRB- Mark ix . -RRB- . 
Those three apostles did not understand what this rising from the dead meant . 
Neither did those Sadducees who asked the Master whose wife she should be in the resurrection who in this life had had seven husbands -LRB- Matt . 
xxii . -RRB- 
; and it was then that Jesus said that God is not the God of the dead , but of the living . 
And the other life is not , in fact , thinkable to us except under the same forms as those of this earthly and transitory life . 
Nor is the mystery at all clarified by that metaphor of the grain and the wheat that it bears , with which Paul answers the question , `` How are the dead raised up , and with what body do they come ? '' 
-LRB- 1 Cor . 
xv . 
35 -RRB- . 
How can a human soul live and enjoy God eternally without losing its individual personality -- that is to say , without losing itself ? 
What is it to enjoy God ? 
What is eternity as opposed to time ? 
Does the soul change or does it not change in the other life ? 
If it does not change , how does it live ? 
And if it changes , how does it preserve its individuality through so vast a period of time ? 
For though the other life may exclude space , it can not exclude time , as Cournot observes in the work quoted above . 
If there is life in heaven there is change . 
Swedenborg remarked that the angels change , because the delight of the celestial life would gradually lose its value if they always enjoyed it in its fullness , and because angels , like men , love themselves , and he who loves himself experiences changes of state ; and he adds further that at times the angels are sad , and that he , Swedenborg , discoursed with some when they were sad -LRB- De Cælo et Inferno , § § 158 , 160 -RRB- . 
In any case , it is impossible for us to conceive life without change , change of growth or of diminution , of sadness or of joy , of love or of hate . 
In effect , an eternal life is unthinkable and an eternal life of absolute felicity , of beatific vision , is more unthinkable still . 
And what precisely is this beatific vision ? 
We observe in the first place that it is called vision and not action , something passive being therefore presupposed . 
And does not this beatific vision suppose loss of personal consciousness ? 
A saint in heaven , says Bossuet , is a being who is scarcely sensible of himself , so completely is he possessed by God and immerged in His glory ... . 
Our attention can not stay on the saint , because one finds him outside of himself , and subject by an unchangeable love to the source of his being and his happiness -LRB- Du culte qui est dû à Dieu -RRB- . 
And these are the words of Bossuet , the antiquietist . 
This loving vision of God supposes an absorption in Him . 
He who in a state of blessedness enjoys God in His fullness must perforce neither think of himself , nor remember himself , nor have any consciousness of himself , but be in perpetual ecstasy -LRB- ekstasis -RRB- outside of himself , in a condition of alienation . 
And the ecstasy that the mystics describe is a prelude of this vision . 
He who sees God shall die , say the Scriptures -LRB- Judg . 
xiii . 
22 -RRB- ; and may it not be that the eternal vision of God is an eternal death , a swooning away of the personality ? 
But St. Teresa , in her description of the last state of prayer , the rapture , transport , flight , or ecstasy of the soul , tells us that the soul is borne as upon a cloud or a mighty eagle , `` but you see yourself carried away and know not whither , '' and it is `` with delight , '' and `` if you do not resist , the senses are not lost , at least I was so much myself as to be able to perceive that I was being lifted up '' -- that is to say , without losing consciousness . 
And God `` appears to be not content with thus attracting the soul to Himself in so real a way , but wishes to have the body also , though it be mortal and of earth so foul . '' 
`` Ofttimes the soul is absorbed -- or , to speak more correctly , the Lord absorbs it in Himself ; and when He has held it thus for a moment , the will alone remains in union with Him '' -- not the intelligence alone . 
We see , therefore , that it is not so much vision as a union of the will , and meanwhile , `` the understanding and memory are distraught ... like one who has slept long and dreamed and is hardly yet awake . '' 
It is `` a soft flight , a delicious flight , a noiseless flight . '' 
And in this delicious flight the consciousness of self is preserved , the awareness of distinction from God with whom one is united . 
And one is raised to this rapture , according to the Spanish mystic , by the contemplation of the Humanity of Christ -- that is to say , of something concrete and human ; it is the vision of the living God , not of the idea of God . 
And in the 28th chapter she tells us that `` though there were nothing else to delight the sight in heaven but the great beauty of the glorified bodies , that would be an excessive bliss , particularly the vision of the Humanity of Jesus Christ our Lord ... '' `` This vision , '' she continues , `` though imaginary , I did never see with my bodily eyes , nor , indeed , any other , but only with the eyes of the soul . '' 
And thus it is that in heaven the soul does not see God only , but everything in God , or rather it sees that everything is God , for God embraces all things . 
And this idea is further emphasized by Jacob Böhme . 
The saint tells us in the Moradas Setimas -LRB- vii . 
2 -RRB- that `` this secret union takes place in the innermost centre of the soul , where God Himself must dwell . '' 
And she goes on to say that `` the soul , I mean the spirit of the soul , is made one with God ... '' ; and this union may be likened to `` two wax candles , the tips of which touch each other so closely that there is but one light ; or again , the wick , the wax , and the light become one , but the one candle can again be separated from the other , and the two candles remain distinct ; or the wick may be withdrawn from the wax . '' 
But there is another more intimate union , and this is `` like rain falling from heaven into a river or stream , becoming one and the same liquid , so that the river and the rain-water can not be divided ; or it resembles a streamlet flowing into the sea , which can not afterwards be disunited from it ; or it may be likened to a room into which a bright light enters through two windows -- though divided when it enters , the light becomes one and the same . '' 
And what difference is there between this and the internal and mystical silence of Miguel de Molinos , the third and most perfect degree of which is the silence of thought ? 
-LRB- Guía Espiritual , book i. , chap . 
xvii. , § 128 -RRB- . 
Do we not here very closely approach the view that `` nothingness is the way to attain to that high state of a mind reformed '' ? 
-LRB- book iii. , chap . 
xx. , § 196 -RRB- . 
And what marvel is it that Amiel in his Journal Intime should twice have made use of the Spanish word nada , nothing , doubtless because he found none more expressive in any other language ? 
And nevertheless , if we read our mystical doctor , St. Teresa , with care , we shall see that the sensitive element is never excluded , the element of delight -- that is to say , the element of personal consciousness . 
The soul allows itself to be absorbed in God in order that it may absorb Him , in order that it may acquire consciousness of its own divinity . 
A beatific vision , a loving contemplation in which the soul is absorbed in God and , as it were , lost in Him , appears either as an annihilation of self or as a prolonged tedium to our natural way of feeling . 
And hence a certain feeling which we not infrequently observe and which has more than once expressed itself in satires , not altogether free from irreverence or perhaps impiety , with reference to the heaven of eternal glory as a place of eternal boredom . 
And it is useless to despise feelings such as these , so wholly natural and spontaneous . 
It is clear that those who feel thus have failed to take note of the fact that man 's highest pleasure consists in acquiring and intensifying consciousness . 
Not the pleasure of knowing , exactly , but rather that of learning . 
In knowing a thing we tend to forget it , to convert it , if the expression may be allowed , into unconscious knowledge . 
Man 's pleasure , his purest delight , is allied with the act of learning , of getting at the truth of things , of acquiring knowledge with differentiation . 
And hence the famous saying of Lessing which I have already quoted . 
There is a story told of an ancient Spaniard who accompanied Vasco Núñez de Balboa when he climbed that peak in Darien from which both the Atlantic and the Pacific are visible . 
On beholding the two oceans the old man fell on his knees and exclaimed , `` I thank Thee , God , that Thou didst not let me die without having seen so great a wonder . '' 
But if this man had stayed there , very soon the wonder would have ceased to be wonderful , and with the wonder the pleasure , too , would have vanished . 
His joy was the joy of discovery . 
And perhaps the joy of the beatific vision may be not exactly that of the contemplation of the supreme Truth , whole and entire -LRB- for this the soul could not endure -RRB- , but rather that of a continual discovery of the Truth , of a ceaseless act of learning involving an effort which keeps the sense of personal consciousness continually active . 
It is difficult for us to conceive a beatific vision of mental quiet , of full knowledge and not of gradual apprehension , as in any way different from a kind of Nirvana , a spiritual diffusion , a dissipation of energy in the essence of God , a return to unconsciousness induced by the absence of shock , of difference -- in a word , of activity . 
May it not be that the very condition which makes our eternal union with God thinkable destroys our longing ? 
What difference is there between being absorbed by God and absorbing Him in ourself ? 
Is it the stream that is lost in the sea or the sea that is lost in the stream ? 
It is all the same . 
Our fundamental feeling is our longing not to lose the sense of the continuity of our consciousness , not to break the concatenation of our memories , the feeling of our own personal concrete identity , even though we may be gradually being absorbed in God , enriching Him . 
Who at eighty years of age remembers the child that he was at eight , conscious though he may be of the unbroken chain connecting the two ? 
And it may be said that the problem for feeling resolves itself into the question as to whether there is a God , whether there is a human finality to the Universe . 
But what is finality ? 
For just as it is always possible to ask the why of every why , so it is also always possible to ask the wherefore of every wherefore . 
Supposing that there is a God , then wherefore God ? 
For Himself , it will be said . 
And someone is sure to reply : What is the difference between this consciousness and no-consciousness ? 
But it will always be true , as Plotinus has said -LRB- Enn . 
, ii. , ix. , 8 -RRB- , that to ask why God made the world is the same as to ask why there is a soul . 
Or rather , not why , but wherefore -LRB- dia ti -RRB- . 
For him who places himself outside himself , in an objective hypothetical position -- which is as much as to say in an inhuman position -- the ultimate wherefore is as inaccessible -- and strictly , as absurd -- as the ultimate why . 
What difference in effect does it make if there is not any finality ? 
What logical contradiction is involved in the Universe not being destined to any finality , either human or superhuman ? 
What objection is there in reason to there being no other purpose in the sum of things save only to exist and happen as it does exist and happen ? 
For him who places himself outside himself , none ; but for him who lives and suffers and desires within himself -- for him it is a question of life or death . 
Seek , therefore , thyself ! 
But in finding oneself , does not one find one 's own nothingness ? 
`` Having become a sinner in seeking himself , man has become wretched in finding himself , '' said Bossuet -LRB- Traité de la Concupiscence , chap . 
xi . -RRB- . 
`` Seek thyself '' begins with `` Know thyself . '' 
To which Carlyle answers -LRB- Past and Present , book iii. , chap . 
xi . -RRB- 
: `` The latest Gospel in this world is , Know thy work and do it . 
` Know thyself ' : long enough has that poor ` self ' of thine tormented thee ; thou wilt never get to ` know ' it , I believe ! 
Think it not thy business , this of knowing thyself ; thou art an unknowable individual : know what thou canst work at ; and work at it , like a Hercules . 
That will be thy better plan . '' 
Yes , but what I work at , will not that too be lost in the end ? 
And if it be lost , wherefore should I work at it ? 
Yes , yes , it may be that to accomplish my work -- and what is my work ? 
-- without thinking about myself , is to love God . 
And what is it to love God ? 
And on the other hand , in loving God in myself , am I not loving myself more than God , am I not loving myself in God ? 
What we really long for after death is to go on living this life , this same mortal life , but without its ills , without its tedium , and without death . 
Seneca , the Spaniard , gave expression to this in his Consolatio ad Marciam -LRB- xxvi . -RRB- 
; what he desired was to live this life again : ista moliri . 
And what Job asked for -LRB- xix . 
25-7 -RRB- was to see God in the flesh , not in the spirit . 
And what but that is the meaning of that comic conception of eternal recurrence which issued from the tragic soul of poor Nietzsche , hungering for concrete and temporal immortality ? 
And this beatific vision which is the primary Catholic solution of the problem , how can it be realized , I ask again , without obliteration of the consciousness of self ? 
Will it not be like a sleep in which we dream without knowing what we dream ? 
Who would wish for an eternal life like that ? 
To think without knowing that we think is not to be sensible of ourselves , it is not to be ourselves . 
And is not eternal life perhaps eternal consciousness , not only seeing God , but seeing that we see Him , seeing ourselves at the same time and ourselves as distinct from Him ? 
He who sleeps lives , but he has no consciousness of himself ; and would anyone wish for an eternal sleep ? 
When Circe advised Ulysses to descend to the abode of the dead in order to consult the soothsayer Teiresias , she told him that Teiresias alone among the shades of the dead was possessed of understanding , for all the others flitted about like shadows -LRB- Odyssey , x. , 487-495 -RRB- . 
And can it be said that the others , apart from Teiresias , had really overcome death ? 
Is it to overcome death to flit about like shadows without understanding ? 
And on the other hand , may we not imagine that possibly this earthly life of ours is to the other life what sleep is to waking ? 
May not all our life be a dream and death an awakening ? 
But an awakening to what ? 
And supposing that everything is but the dream of God and that God one day will awaken ? 
Will He remember His dream ? 
Aristotle , the rationalist , tells in his Ethics of the superior happiness of the contemplative life , bios theôrêtikos ; and all rationalists are wont to place happiness in knowledge . 
And the conception of eternal happiness , of the enjoyment of God , as a beatific vision , as knowledge and comprehension of God , is a thing of rationalist origin , it is the kind of happiness that corresponds with the God-Idea of Aristotelianism . 
But the truth is that , in addition to vision , happiness demands delight , and this is a thing which has very little to do , with rationalism and is only attainable when we feel ourselves distinct from God . 
Our Aristotelian Catholic theologian , the author of the endeavour to rationalize Catholic feeling , St. Thomas Aquinas , tells us in his Summa -LRB- prima secundæ partis , quæstio iv. , art . 
i -RRB- that `` delight is requisite for happiness . 
For delight is caused by the fact of desire resting in attained good . 
Hence , since happiness is nothing but the attainment of the Sovereign Good , there can not be happiness without concomitant delight . '' 
But where is the delight of him who rests ? 
To rest , requiescere -- is not that to sleep and not to possess even the consciousness that one is resting ? 
`` Delight is caused by the vision of God itself , '' the theologian continues . 
But does the soul feel itself distinct from God ? 
`` The delight that accompanies the activity of the understanding does not impede , but rather strengthens that activity , '' he says later on . 
Obviously ! 
for what happiness were it else ? 
And in order to save delectation , delight , pleasure , which , like pain , has always something material in it , and which we conceive of only as existing in a soul incarnate in a body , it was necessary to suppose that the soul in a state of blessedness is united with its body . 
Apart from some kind of body , how is delight possible ? 
The immortality of the pure soul , without some sort of body or spirit-covering , is not true immortality . 
And at bottom , what we long for is a prolongation of this life , this life and no other , this life of flesh and suffering , this life which we imprecate at times simply because it comes to an end . 
The majority of suicides would not take their lives if they had the assurance that they would never die on this earth . 
The self-slayer kills himself because he will not wait for death . 
When in the thirty-third canto of the Paradiso , Dante relates how he attained to the vision of God , he tells us that just as a man who beholds somewhat in his sleep retains on awakening nothing but the impression of the feeling in his mind , so it was with him , for when the vision had all but passed away the sweetness that sprang from it still distilled itself in his heart . 
Cotal son to , che quasi tutta cessa mia visione ed ancor mi distilla nel cuor lo dulce che nacque da essa like snow that melts in the sun -- cosi la neve al sol si disigilla . 
That is to say , that the vision , the intellectual content , passes , and that which remains is the delight , the passione impressa , the emotional , the irrational -- in a word , the corporeal . 
What we desire is not merely spiritual felicity , not merely vision , but delight , bodily happiness . 
The other happiness , the rationalist beatitude , the happiness of being submerged in understanding , can only -- I will not say satisfy or deceive , for I do not believe that it ever satisfied or deceived even a Spinoza . 
At the conclusion of his Ethic , in propositions xxxv . 
and xxxvi . 
of the fifth part , Spinoza , affirms that God loves Himself with an infinite intellectual love ; that the intellectual love of the mind towards God is the selfsame love with which God loves Himself , not in so far as He is infinite , but in so far as He can be manifested through the essence of the human mind , considered under the form of eternity -- that is to say , that the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love with which God loves Himself . 
And after these tragic , these desolating propositions , we are told in the last proposition of the whole book , that which closes and crowns this tremendous tragedy of the Ethic , that happiness is not the reward of virtue , but virtue itself , and that our repression of our desires is not the cause of our enjoyment of virtue , but rather because we find enjoyment in virtue we are able to repress our desires . 
Intellectual love ! 
intellectual love ! 
what is this intellectual love ? 
Something of the nature of a red flavour , or a bitter sound , or an aromatic colour , or rather something of the same sort as a love-stricken triangle or an enraged ellipse -- a pure metaphor , but a tragic metaphor . 
And a metaphor corresponding tragically with that saying that the heart also has its reasons . 
Reasons of the heart ! 
loves of the head ! 
intellectual delight ! 
delicious intellection ! 
-- tragedy , tragedy , tragedy ! 
And nevertheless there is something which may be called intellectual love , and that is the love of understanding , that which Aristotle meant by the contemplative life , for there is something of action and of love in the act of understanding , and the beatific vision is the vision of the total truth . 
Is there not perhaps at the root of every passion something of curiosity ? 
Did not our first parents , according to the Biblical story , fall because of their eagerness to taste of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , and to be as gods , knowers of this knowledge ? 
The vision of God -- that is to say , the vision of the Universe itself , in its soul , in its inmost essence -- would not that appease all our longing ? 
And this vision can fail to satisfy only men of a gross mind who do not perceive that the greatest joy of man is to be more man -- that is , more God -- and that man is more God the more consciousness he has . 
And this intellectual love , which is nothing but the so-called platonic love , is a means to dominion and possession . 
There is , in fact , no more perfect dominion than knowledge ; he who knows something , possesses it . 
Knowledge unites the knower with the known . 
`` I contemplate thee and in contemplating thee I make thee mine '' -- such is the formula . 
And to know God , what can that be but to possess Him ? 
He who knows God is thereby himself God . 
In La Dégradation de l'énergie -LRB- iv ^ e partie , chap . 
xviii. , 2 -RRB- B. Brunhes relates a story concerning the great Catholic mathematician Cauchy , communicated to him by M. Sarrau , who had it from Père Gratry . 
While Cauchy and Père Gratry were walking in the gardens of the Luxumbourg , their conversation turned upon the happiness which those in heaven would have in knowing at last , without any obscurity or limitation , the truths which they had so long and so laboriously sought to investigate on earth . 
In allusion to the study which Cauchy had made of the mechanistic theory of the reflection of light , Père Gratry threw out the suggestion that one on the greatest intellectual joys of the great geometrician in the future life would be to penetrate into the secret of light . 
To which Cauchy replied that it did not appear to him to be possible to know more about this than he himself already knew , neither could he conceive how the most perfect intelligence could arrive at a clearer comprehension of the mystery of reflection than that manifested in his own explanation of it , seeing that he had furnished a mechanistic theory of the phenomenon . 
`` His piety , '' Brunhes adds , `` did not extend to a belief that God Himself could have created anything different or anything better . '' 
From this narrative two points of interest emerge . 
The first is the idea expressed in it as to what contemplation , intellectual love , or beatific vision , may mean for men of a superior order of intelligence , men whose ruling passion is knowledge ; and the second is the implicit faith shown in the mechanistic explanation of the world . 
This mechanistic tendency of the intellect coheres with the well-known formula , `` Nothing is created , nothing is lost , everything is transformed '' -- a formula by means of which it has been sought to interpret the ambiguous principle of the conservation of energy , forgetting that practically , for us , for men , energy is utilizable energy , and that this is continually being lost , dissipated by the diffusion of heat , and degraded , its tendency being to arrive at a dead-level and homogeneity . 
That which has value , and more than value , reality , for us , is the differential , which is the qualitative ; pure , undifferentiated quantity is for us as if it did not exist , for it does not act . 
And the material Universe , the body of the Universe , would appear to be gradually proceeding -- unaffected by the retarding action of living organisms or even by the conscious action of man -- towards a state of perfect stability , of homogeneity -LRB- vide Brunhes , op . 
cit . -RRB- 
For , while spirit tends towards concentration , material energy tends towards diffusion . 
And may not this have an intimate relation with our problem ? 
May there not be a connection between this conclusion of scientific philosophy with respect to a final state of stability and homogeneity and the mystical dream of the apocatastasis ? 
May not this death of the body of the Universe be the final triumph of its spirit , of God ? 
It is manifest that there is an intimate relation between the religious need of an eternal life after death and the conclusions -- always provisional -- at which scientific philosophy arrives with respect to the probable future of the material or sensible Universe . 
And the fact is that just as there are theologians of God and the immortality of the soul , so there are also those whom Brunhes calls -LRB- op . 
cit . 
, chap . 
xxvi. , § 2 -RRB- theologians of monism , and whom it would perhaps be better to call atheologians , people who pertinaciously adhere to the spirit of a priori affirmation ; and this becomes intolerable , Brunhes adds , when they harbour the pretension of despising theology . 
A notable type of these gentlemen may be found in Haeckel , who has succeeded in solving the riddles of Nature ! 
These atheologians have seized upon the principle of the conservation of energy , the `` Nothing is created , nothing is lost , everything is transformed '' formula , the theological origin of which is seen in Descartes , and have made use of it as a means whereby we are able to dispense with God . 
`` The world built to last , '' Brunhes comments , `` resisting all wear and tear , or rather automatically repairing the rents that appear in it -- what a splendid theme for oratorical amplification ! 
But these same amplifications which served in the seventeenth century to prove the wisdom of the Creator have been used in our days as arguments for those who presume to do without Him . '' 
It is the old story : so-called scientific philosophy , the origin and inspiration of which is fundamentally theological or religious , ending in an atheology or irreligion , which is itself nothing else but theology and religion . 
Let us call to mind the comments of Ritschl upon this head , already quoted in this work . 
To-day the last word of science , or rather of scientific philosophy , appears to be that , by virtue of the degradation of energy , of the predominance of irreversible phenomena , the material , sensible world is travelling towards a condition of ultimate levelness , a kind of final homogeneity . 
And this brings to our mind the hypothesis , not only so much used but abused by Spencer , of a primordial homogeneity , and his fantastic theory of the instability of the homogeneous . 
An instability that required the atheological agnosticism of Spencer in order to explain the inexplicable transition from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous . 
For how , without any action from without , can any heterogeneity emerge from perfect and absolute homogeneity ? 
But as it was necessary to get rid of every kind of creation , `` the unemployed engineer turned metaphysician , '' as Papini called him , invented the theory of the instability of the homogeneous , which is more ... what shall I say ? 
more mystical , and even more mythological if you like , than the creative action of God . 
The Italian positivist , Roberto Ardigo , was nearer the mark when , objecting to Spencer 's theory , he said that the most natural supposition was that things always were as they are now , that always there have been worlds in process of formation , in the nebulous stage , worlds completely formed and worlds in process of dissolution ; that heterogeneity , in short , is eternal . 
Another way , it will be seen , of not solving the riddle . 
Is this perhaps the solution ? 
But in that case the Universe would be infinite , and in reality we are unable to conceive a Universe that is both eternal and limited such as that which served as the basis of Nietzsche 's theory of eternal recurrence . 
If the Universe must be eternal , if within it and as regards each of its component worlds , periods in which the movement is towards homogeneity , towards the degradation of energy , must alternate with other periods in which the movement is towards heterogeneity , then it is necessary that the Universe should be infinite , that there should be scope , always and in each world , for some action coming from without . 
And , in fact , the body of God can not be other than eternal and infinite . 
But as far as our own world is concerned , its gradual levelling-down -- or , we might say , its death -- appears to be proved . 
And how will this process affect the fate of our spirit ? 
Will it wane with the degradation of the energy of our world and return to unconsciousness , or will it rather grow according as the utilizable energy diminishes and by virtue of the very efforts that it makes to retard this degradation and to dominate Nature ? 
-- for this it is that constitutes the life of the spirit . 
May it be that consciousness and its extended support are two powers in contraposition , the one growing at the expense of the other ? 
The fact is that the best of our scientific work , the best of our industry -LRB- that part of it I mean -- and it is a large part -- that does not tend to destruction -RRB- , is directed towards retarding this fatal process of the degradation of energy . 
And organic life , the support of our consciousness , is itself an effort to avoid , so far as it is possible , this fatal period , to postpone it . 
It is useless to seek to deceive ourselves with pagan pæans in praise of Nature , for as Leopardi , that Christian atheist , said with profound truth in his stupendous poem La Ginestra , Nature `` gives us life like a mother , but loves us like a step-mother . '' 
The origin of human companionship was opposition to Nature ; it was horror of impious Nature that first linked men together in the bonds of society . 
It is human society , in effect , the source of reflective consciousness and of the craving for immortality , that inaugurates the state of grace upon the state of Nature ; and it is man who , by humanizing and spiritualizing Nature by his industry , supernaturalizes her . 
In two amazing sonnets which he called Redemption , the tragic Portuguese poet , Antero de Quental , embodied his dream of a spirit imprisoned , not in atoms or ions or crystals , but -- as is natural in a poet -- in the sea , in trees , in the forest , in the mountains , in the wind , in all material individualities and forms ; and he imagines that a day may come when all these captive souls , as yet in the limbo of existence , will awaken to consciousness , and , emerging as pure thought from the forms that imprisoned them , they will see these forms , the creatures of illusion , fall away and dissolve like a baseless vision . 
It is a magnificent dream of the penetration of everything by consciousness . 
May it not be that the Universe , our Universe -- who knows if there are others ? 
-- began with a zero of spirit -- and zero is not the same as nothing -- and an infinite of matter , and that its goal is to end with an infinite of spirit and a zero of matter ? 
Dreams ! 
May it be that everything has a soul and that this soul begs to be freed ? 
Oh tierras de Alvargonzález , en el corazón de España , tierras pobres , tierras tristes , tan tristes que tienen alma ! 
sings our poet Antonio Machado in his Campos de Castilla . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- Is the sadness of the field in the fields themselves or in us who look upon them ? 
Do they not suffer ? 
But what can an individual soul in a world of matter actually be ? 
Is it the rock or the mountain that is the individual ? 
Is it the tree ? 
And nevertheless the fact always remains that spirit and matter are at strife . 
This is the thought that Espronceda expressed when he wrote : Aquí , para vivir en santa calma , o sobra la materia , o sobra el alma . 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And is there not in the history of thought , or of human imagination if you prefer it , something that corresponds to this process of the reduction of matter , in the sense of a reduction of everything to consciousness ? 
Yes , there is , and its author is the first Christian mystic , St. Paul of Tarsus , the Apostle of the Gentiles , he who because he had never with his bodily eyes looked upon the face of the fleshly and mortal Christ , the ethical Christ , created within himself an immortal and religious Christ -- he who was caught up into the third heaven and there beheld secret and unspeakable things -LRB- 2 Cor . 
xii . -RRB- . 
And this first Christian mystic dreamed also of a final triumph of spirit , of consciousness , and this is what in theology is technically called the apocatastasis or restitution . 
In 1 Cor . 
xv . 
26-28 he tells us that `` the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death , for he hath put all things under his feet . 
But when he saith all things are put under him , it is manifest that he is excepted , which did put all things under him . 
And when all things shall be subdued unto him , then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him , that God may be all in all '' : hina hê ho theos panta en pasin -- that is to say , that the end is that God , Consciousness , will end by being all in all . 
This doctrine is completed by Paul 's teaching , in his Epistle to the Ephesians , with regard to the end of the whole history of the world . 
In this Epistle , as you know , he represents Christ -- by whom `` were all things created , that are in heaven and that are in earth , visible and invisible '' -LRB- Col. i. 16 -RRB- -- as the head over all things -LRB- Eph . 
i. 22 -RRB- , and in him , in this head , we all shall be raised up that we may live in the communion of saints and that we `` may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth , and length , and depth , and height , and to know the love of Christ , which passeth knowledge '' -LRB- Eph . 
iii . 
18 , 19 -RRB- . 
And this gathering of us together in Christ , who is the head and , as it were , the compendium , of Humanity , is what the Apostle calls the gathering or collecting together or recapitulating of all things in Christ , anakephalaiôsthai ta panta en Christô . 
And this recapitulation -- anakephalaiôsis , anacefaleosis -- the end of the world 's history and of the human race , is merely another aspect of the apocatastasis . 
The apocatastasis , God 's coming to be all in all , thus resolves itself into the anacefaleosis , the gathering together of all things in Christ , in Humanity -- Humanity therefore being the end of creation . 
And does not this apocatastasis , this humanization or divinization of all things , do away with matter ? 
But if matter , which is the principle of individuation , the scholastic principium individuationis , is once done away with , does not everything return to pure consciousness , which , in its pure purity , neither knows itself nor is it anything that can be conceived or felt ? 
And if matter be abolished , what support is there left for spirit ? 
Thus a different train of thought leads us to the same difficulties , the same unthinkabilities . 
It may be said , on the other hand , that the apocatastasis , God 's coming to be all in all , presupposes that there was a time when He was not all in all . 
The supposition that all beings shall attain to the enjoyment of God implies the supposition that God shall attain to the enjoyment of all beings , for the beatific vision is mutual , and God is perfected in being better known , and His being is nourished and enriched with souls . 
Following up the track of these wild dreams , we might imagine an unconscious God , slumbering in matter , and gradually wakening into consciousness of everything , consciousness of His own divinity ; we might imagine the whole Universe becoming conscious of itself as a whole and becoming conscious of each of its constituent consciousnesses , becoming God . 
But in that case , how did this unconscious God begin ? 
Is He not matter itself ? 
God would thus be not the beginning but the end of the Universe ; but can that be the end which was not the beginning ? 
Or can it be that outside time , in eternity , there is a difference between beginning and end ? 
`` The soul of all things can not be bound by that very thing -- that is , matter -- which it itself has bound , '' says Plotinus -LRB- Enn . 
ii. , ix . 
7 -RRB- . 
Or is it not rather the Consciousness of the Whole that strives to become the consciousness of each part and to make each partial consciousness conscious of itself -- that is , of the total consciousness ? 
Is not this universal soul a monotheist or solitary God who is in process of becoming a pantheist God ? 
And if it is not so , if matter and pain are alien to God , wherefore , it will be asked , did God create the world ? 
For what purpose did He make matter and introduce pain ? 
Would it not have been better if He had not made anything ? 
What added glory does He gain by the creation of angels or of men whose fall He must punish with eternal torment ? 
Did He perhaps create evil for the sake of remedying it ? 
Or was redemption His design , redemption complete and absolute , redemption of all things and of all men ? 
For this hypothesis is neither more rational nor more pious than the other . 
In so far as we attempt to represent eternal happiness to ourselves , we are confronted by a series of questions to which there is no satisfactory -- that is , rational -- answer , and it matters not whether the supposition from which we start be monotheist , or pantheist , or even panentheist . 
Let us return to the Pauline apocatastasis . 
Is it not possible that in becoming all in all God completes Himself , becomes at last fully God , an infinite consciousness embracing all consciousnesses ? 
And what is an infinite consciousness ? 
Since consciousness supposes limitation , or rather since consciousness is consciousness of limitation , of distinction , does it not thereby exclude infinitude ? 
What value has the notion of infinitude applied to consciousness ? 
What is a consciousness that is all consciousness , without anything outside it that is not consciousness ? 
In such a case , of what is consciousness the consciousness ? 
Of its content ? 
Or may it not rather be that , starting from chaos , from absolute unconsciousness , in the eternity of the past , we continually approach the apocatastasis or final apotheosis without ever reaching it ? 
May not this apocatastasis , this return of all things to God , be rather an ideal term to which we unceasingly approach -- some of us with fleeter step than others -- but which we are destined never to reach ? 
May not the absolute and perfect eternal happiness be an eternal hope , which would die if it were to be realized ? 
Is it possible to be happy without hope ? 
And there is no place for hope when once possession has been realized , for hope , desire , is killed by possession . 
May it not be , I say , that all souls grow without ceasing , some in a greater measure than others , but all having to pass some time through the same degree of growth , whatever that degree may be , and yet without ever arriving at the infinite , at God , to whom they continually approach ? 
Is not eternal happiness an eternal hope , with its eternal nucleus of sorrow in order that happiness shall not be swallowed up in nothingness ? 
Follow more questions to which there is no answer . 
`` He shall be all in all , '' says the Apostle . 
But will His mode of being in each one be different or will it be the same for all alike ? 
Will not God be wholly in one of the damned ? 
Is He not in his soul ? 
Is He not in what is called hell ? 
And in what sense is He in hell ? 
Whence arise new problems , those relating to the opposition between heaven and hell , between eternal happiness and eternal unhappiness . 
May it not be that in the end all shall be saved , including Cain and Judas and Satan himself , as Origen 's development of the Pauline apocatastasis led him to hope ? 
When our Catholic theologians seek to justify rationally -- or in other words , ethically -- the dogma of the eternity of the pains of hell , they put forward reasons so specious , ridiculous , and childish , that it would appear impossible that they should ever have obtained currency . 
For to assert that since God is infinite , an offence committed against Him is infinite also and therefore demands an eternal punishment , is , apart from the inconceivability of an infinite offence , to be unaware that , in human ethics , if not in the human police system , the gravity of the offence is measured not by the dignity of the injured person but by the intention of the injurer , and that to speak of an infinite culpable intention is sheer nonsense , and nothing else . 
In this connection those words which Christ addressed to His Father are capable of application : `` Father , forgive them , for they know not what they do , '' and no man who commits an offence against God or his neighbour knows what he does . 
In human ethics , or if you like in human police regulations -- that which is called penal law and is anything but law -LSB- 52 -RSB- eternal punishment is a meaningless phrase . 
`` God is just and punishes us ; that is all we need to know ; as far as we are concerned the rest is merely curiosity . '' 
Such was the conclusion of Lamennais -LRB- Essai , etc. , iv ^ e partie , chap , vii . -RRB- 
, an opinion shared by many others . 
Calvin also held the same view . 
But is there anyone who is content with this ? 
Pure curiosity ! 
-- to call this load that wellnigh crushes our heart pure curiosity ! 
May we not say , perhaps , that the evil man is annihilated because he wished to be annihilated , or that he did not wish strongly enough to eternalize himself because he was evil ? 
May we not say that it is not believing in the other life that makes a man good , but rather that being good makes him believe in it ? 
And what is being good and being evil ? 
These states pertain to the sphere of ethics , not of religion : or , rather , does not the doing good though being evil pertain to ethics , and the being good though doing evil to religion ? 
Shall we not perhaps be told , on the other hand , that if the sinner suffers an eternal punishment , it is because he does not cease to sin ? 
-- for the damned sin without ceasing . 
This , however , is no solution of the problem , which derives all its absurdity from the fact that punishment has been conceived as vindictiveness or vengeance , not as correction , has been conceived after the fashion of barbarous peoples . 
And in the same way hell has been conceived as a sort of police institution , necessary in order to put fear into the world . 
And the worst of it is that it no longer intimidates , and therefore will have to be shut up . 
But , on the other hand , as a religious conception and veiled in mystery , why not -- although the idea revolts our feelings -- an eternity of suffering ? 
why not a God who is nourished by our suffering ? 
Is our happiness the end of the Universe ? 
or may we possibly sustain with our suffering some alien happiness ? 
Let us read again in the Eumenides of that terrible tragedian , Æschylus , those choruses of the Furies in which they curse the new gods for overturning the ancient laws and snatching Orestes from their hands -- impassioned invectives against the Apollinian redemption . 
Does not redemption tear man , their captive and plaything , from the hands of the gods , who delight and amuse themselves in his sufferings , like children , as the tragic poet says , torturing beetles ? 
And let us remember the cry , `` My God , my God , why hast thou forsaken me ? '' 
Yes , why not an eternity of suffering ? 
Hell is an eternalization of the soul , even though it be an eternity of pain . 
Is not pain essential to life ? 
Men go on inventing theories to explain what they call the origin of evil . 
And why not the origin of good ? 
Why suppose that it is good that is positive and original , and evil that is negative and derivatory ? 
`` Everything that is , in so far as it is , is good , '' St. Augustine affirmed . 
But why ? 
What does `` being good '' mean ? 
Good is good for something , conducive to an end , and to say that everything is good is equivalent to saying that everything is making for its end . 
But what is its end ? 
Our desire is to eternalize ourselves , to persist , and we call good everything that conspires to this end and bad everything that tends to lessen or destroy our consciousness . 
We suppose that human consciousness is an end and not a means to something else which may not be consciousness , whether human or superhuman . 
All metaphysical optimism , such as that of Leibnitz , and all metaphysical pessimism , such as that of Schopenhauer , have no other foundation than this . 
