We wish to save our memory -- at any rate , our memory . 
How long will it last ? 
At most as long as the human race lasts . 
And what if we shall save our memory in God ? 
Unhappy , I know well , are these confessions ; but from the depth of unhappiness springs new life , and only by draining the lees of spiritual sorrow can we at last taste the honey that lies at the bottom of the cup of life . 
Anguish leads us to consolation . 
This thirst for eternal life is appeased by many , especially by the simple , at the fountain of religious faith ; but to drink of this is not given to all . 
The institution whose primordial end is to protect this faith in the personal immortality of the soul is Catholicism ; but Catholicism has sought to rationalize this faith by converting religion into theology , by offering a philosophy , and a philosophy of the thirteenth century , as a basis for vital belief . 
This and its consequences we will now proceed to examine . 
Let us now approach the Christian , Catholic , Pauline , or Athanasian solution of our inward vital problem , the hunger of immortality . 
Christianity sprang from the confluence of two mighty spiritual streams -- the one Judaic , the other Hellenic -- each of which had already influenced the other , and Rome finally gave it a practical stamp and social permanence . 
It has been asserted , perhaps somewhat precipitately , that primitive Christianity was an-eschatological , that faith in another life after death is not clearly manifested in it , but rather a belief in the proximate end of the world and establishment of the kingdom of God , a belief known as chiliasm . 
But were they not fundamentally one and the same thing ? 
Faith in the immortality of the soul , the nature of which was not perhaps very precisely defined , may be said to be a kind of tacit understanding or supposition underlying the whole of the Gospel ; and it is the mental orientation of many of those who read it to-day , an orientation contrary to that of the Christians from among whom the Gospel sprang , that prevents them from seeing this . 
Without doubt all that about the second coming of Christ , when he shall come among the clouds , clothed with majesty and great power , to judge the quick and the dead , to open to some the kingdom of heaven and to cast others into Gehenna , where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth , may be understood in a chiliastic sense ; and it is even said of Christ in the Gospel -LRB- Mark ix . 
I -RRB- , that there were with him some who should not taste of death till they had seen the kingdom of God -- that is , that the kingdom should come during their generation . 
And in the same chapter , verse 10 , it is said of Peter and James and John , who went up with Jesus to the Mount of Transfiguration and heard him say that he would rise again from the dead , that `` they kept that saying within themselves , questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean . '' 
And at all events the Gospel was written when this belief , the basis and raison d'être of Christianity , was in process of formation . 
See Matt . 
xxii . 
29-32 ; Mark xii . 
24-27 ; Luke xvi . 
22-31 ; xx . 
34-37 ; John v. 24-29 ; vi . 
40 , 54 , 58 ; viii . 
51 ; xi . 
25 , 56 ; xiv . 
2 , 19 . 
And , above all , that passage in Matt . 
xxvii . 
52 , which tells how at the resurrection of Christ `` many bodies of the saints which slept arose . '' 
And this was not a natural resurrection . 
No ; the Christian faith was born of the faith that Jesus did not remain dead , but that God raised him up again , and that this resurrection was a fact ; but this did not presuppose a mere immortality of the soul in the philosophical sense -LRB- see Harnack , Dogmengeschichte , Prolegomena , v. 4 -RRB- . 
For the first Fathers of the Church themselves the immortality of the soul was not a thing pertaining to the natural order ; the teaching of the Divine Scriptures , as Nimesius said , sufficed for its demonstration , and it was , according to Lactantius , a gift -- and as such gratuitous -- of God . 
But more of this later . 
Christianity sprang , as we have said , from two great spiritual streams -- the Judaic and the Hellenic -- each one of which had arrived on its account , if not at a precise definition of , at any rate at a definite yearning for , another life . 
Among the Jews faith in another life was neither general nor clear ; but they were led to it by faith in a personal and living God , the formation of which faith comprises all their spiritual history . 
Jahwé , the Judaic God , began by being one god among many others -- the God of the people of Israel , revealed among the thunders of the tempest on Mount Sinai . 
But he was so jealous that he demanded that worship should be paid to him alone , and it was by way of monocultism that the Jews arrived at monotheism . 
He was adored as a living force , not as a metaphysical entity , and he was the god of battles . 
But this God of social and martial origin , to whose genesis we shall have to return later , became more inward and personal in the prophets , and in becoming more inward and personal he thereby became more individual and more universal . 
He is the Jahwé who , instead of loving Israel because Israel is his son , takes Israel for a son because he loves him -LRB- Hosea xi . 
1 -RRB- . 
And faith in the personal God , in the Father of men , carries with it faith in the eternalization of the individual man -- a faith which had already dawned in Pharisaism even before Christ . 
Hellenic culture , on its side , ended by discovering death ; and to discover death is to discover the hunger of immortality . 
This longing does not appear in the Homeric poems , which are not initial , but final , in their character , marking not the start but the close of a civilization . 
They indicate the transition from the old religion of Nature , of Zeus , to the more spiritual religion of Apollo -- of redemption . 
But the popular and inward religion of the Eleusinian mysteries , the worship of souls and ancestors , always persisted underneath . 
`` In so far as it is possible to speak of a Delphic theology , among its more important elements must be counted the belief in the continuation of the life of souls after death in its popular forms , and in the worship of the souls of the dead . '' 
-LSB- 13 -RSB- There were the Titanic and the Dionysiac elements , and it was the duty of man , according to the Orphic doctrine , to free himself from the fetters of the body , in which the soul was like a captive in a prison -LRB- see Rohde , Psyche , `` Die Orphiker , '' 4 -RRB- . 
The Nietzschean idea of eternal recurrence is an Orphic idea . 
But the idea of the immortality of the soul was not a philosophical principle . 
The attempt of Empedocles to harmonize a hylozoistic system with spiritualism proved that a philosophical natural science can not by itself lead to a corroboration of the axiom of the perpetuity of the individual soul ; it could only serve as a support to a theological speculation . 
It was by a contradiction that the first Greek philosophers affirmed immortality , by abandoning natural philosophy and intruding into theology , by formulating not an Apollonian but a Dionysiac and Orphic dogma . 
But `` an immortality of the soul as such , in virtue of its own nature and condition as an imperishable divine force in the mortal body , was never an object of popular Hellenic belief '' -LRB- Rohde , op . 
cit . -RRB- . 
Recall the Phædo of Plato and the neo-platonic lucubrations . 
In them the yearning for personal immortality already shows itself -- a yearning which , as it was left totally unsatisfied by reason , produced the Hellenic pessimism . 
For , as Pfleiderer very well observes -LRB- Religionsphilosophie auf geschichtliche Grundlage , 3 . 
Berlin , 1896 -RRB- , `` no people ever came upon the earth so serene and sunny as the Greeks in the youthful days of their historical existence ... but no people changed so completely their idea of the value of life . 
The Hellenism which ended in the religious speculations of neo-pythagorism and neo-platonism viewed this world , which had once appeared to it so joyous and radiant , as an abode of darkness and error , and earthly existence as a period of trial which could never be too quickly traversed . '' 
Nirvana is an Hellenic idea . 
Thus Jews and Greeks each arrived independently at the real discovery of death -- a discovery which occasions , in peoples as in men , the entrance into spiritual puberty , the realization of the tragic sense of life , and it is then that the living God is begotten by humanity . 
The discovery of death is that which reveals God to us , and the death of the perfect man , Christ , was the supreme revelation of death , being the death of the man who ought not to have died yet did die . 
Such a discovery -- that of immortality -- prepared as it was by the Judaic and Hellenic religious processes , was a specifically Christian discovery . 
And its full achievement was due above all to Paul of Tarsus , the hellenizing Jew and Pharisee . 
Paul had not personally known Jesus , and hence he discovered him as Christ . 
`` It may be said that the theology of the Apostle Paul is , in general , the first Christian theology . 
For him it was a necessity ; it was , in a certain sense , his substitution for the lack of a personal knowledge of Jesus , '' says Weizsäcker -LRB- Das apostolische Zeitalter der christlichen Kirche . 
Freiburg-i . 
- B. , 1892 -RRB- . 
He did not know Jesus , but he felt him born again in himself , and thus he could say , `` Nevertheless I live , yet not I , but Christ liveth in me . '' 
-LSB- 14 -RSB- And he preached the Cross , unto the Jews a stumbling-block , and unto the Greeks foolishness -LRB- I Cor . 
i. 23 -RRB- , and the central doctrine for the converted Apostle was that of the resurrection of Christ . 
The important thing for him was that Christ had been made man and had died and had risen again , and not what he did in his life -- not his ethical work as a teacher , but his religious work as a giver of immortality . 
And he it was who wrote those immortal words : `` Now if Christ be preached that He rose from the dead , how say some among you that there is no resurrection from the dead ? 
But if there be no resurrection of the dead , then is Christ not risen ; and if Christ be not risen , then is our preaching vain , and your faith is also vain ... . 
Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished . 
If in this life only we have hope in Christ , we are of all men most miserable '' -LRB- I Cor . 
xv . 
12-19 -RRB- . 
And it is possible to affirm that thenceforward he who does not believe in the bodily resurrection of Christ may be Christophile but can not be specifically Christian . 
It is true that a Justin Martyr could say that `` all those are Christians who live in accordance with reason , even though they may be deemed to be atheists , as , among the Greeks , Socrates and Heraclitus and other such '' ; but this martyr , is he a martyr -- that is to say a witness -- of Christianity ? 
No . 
And it was around this dogma , inwardly experienced by Paul , the dogma of the resurrection and immortality of Christ , the guarantee of the resurrection and immortality of each believer , that the whole of Christology was built up . 
The God-man , the incarnate Word , came in order that man , according to his mode , might be made God -- that is , immortal . 
And the Christian God , the Father of Christ , a God necessarily anthropomorphic , is He who -- as the Catechism of Christian Doctrine which we were made to learn by heart at school says -- created the world for man , for each man . 
And the end of redemption , in spite of appearances due to an ethical deflection of a dogma properly religious , was to save us from death rather than from sin , or from sin in so far as sin implies death . 
And Christ died , or rather rose again , for me , for each one of us . 
And a certain solidarity was established between God and His creature . 
Malebranche said that the first man fell in order that Christ might redeem us , rather than that Christ redeemed us because man had fallen . 
After the death of Paul years passed , and generations of Christianity wrought upon this central dogma and its consequences in order to safeguard faith in the immortality of the individual soul , and the Council of Nicæa came , and with it the formidable Athanasius , whose name is still a battle-cry , an incarnation of the popular faith . 
Athanasius was a man of little learning but of great faith , and above all of popular faith , devoured by the hunger of immortality . 
And he opposed Arianism , which , like Unitarian and Socinian Protestantism , threatened , although unknowingly and unintentionally , the foundation of that belief . 
For the Arians , Christ was first and foremost a teacher -- a teacher of morality , the wholly perfect man , and therefore the guarantee that we may all attain to supreme perfection ; but Athanasius felt that Christ can not make us gods if he has not first made himself God ; if his Divinity had been communicated , he could not have communicated it to us . 
`` He was not , therefore , '' he said , `` first man and then became God ; but He was first God and then became man in order that He might the better deify us -LRB- theopoiêsê -RRB- '' -LRB- Orat . 
i. 39 -RRB- . 
It was not the Logos of the philosophers , the cosmological Logos , that Athanasius knew and adored ; -LSB- 15 -RSB- and thus he instituted a separation between nature and revelation . 
The Athanasian or Nicene Christ , who is the Catholic Christ , is not the cosmological , nor even , strictly , the ethical Christ ; he is the eternalizing , the deifying , the religious Christ . 
Harnack says of this Christ , the Christ of Nicene or Catholic Christology , that he is essentially docetic -- that is , apparential -- because the process of the divinization of the man in Christ was made in the interests of eschatology . 
But which is the real Christ ? 
Is it , indeed , that so-called historical Christ of rationalist exegesis who is diluted for us in a myth or in a social atom ? 
This same Harnack , a Protestant rationalist , tells us that Arianism or Unitarianism would have been the death of Christianity , reducing it to cosmology and ethics , and that it served only as a bridge whereby the learned might pass over to Catholicism -- that is to say , from reason to faith . 
To this same learned historian of dogmas it appears to be an indication of a perverse state of things that the man Athanasius , who saved Christianity as the religion of a living communion with God , should have obliterated the Jesus of Nazareth , the historical Jesus , whom neither Paul nor Athanasius knew personally , nor yet Harnack himself . 
Among Protestants , this historical Jesus is subjected to the scalpel of criticism , while the Catholic Christ lives , the really historical Christ , he who lives throughout the centuries guaranteeing the faith in personal immortality and personal salvation . 
And Athanasius had the supreme audacity of faith , that of asserting things mutually contradictory : `` The complete contradiction that exists in the homoousios carried in its train a whole army of contradictions which increased as thought advanced , '' says Harnack . 
Yes , so it was , and so it had to be . 
And he adds : `` Dogma took leave for ever of clear thinking and tenable concepts , and habituated itself to the contra-rational . '' 
In truth , it drew closer to life , which is contra-rational and opposed to clear thinking . 
Not only are judgements of worth never rationalizable -- they are anti-rational . 
At Nicæa , then , as afterwards at the Vatican , victory rested with the idiots -- taking this word in its proper , primitive , and etymological sense -- the simple-minded , the rude and headstrong bishops , the representatives of the genuine human spirit , the popular spirit , the spirit that does not want to die , in spite of whatever reason may say , and that seeks a guarantee , the most material possible , for this desire . 
Quid ad æternitatem ? 
This is the capital question . 
And the Creed ends with that phrase , resurrectionem mortuorum et vitam venturi sæculi -- the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come . 
In the cemetery of Mallona , in my native town of Bilbao , there is a tombstone on which this verse is carved : Aunque estamos en polvo convertidos , en Ti , Señor , nuestra esperanza fía , que tornaremos a vivir vestidos con la carne y la piel que nos cubria . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- `` With the same bodies and souls that they had , '' as the Catechism says . 
So much so , that it is orthodox Catholic doctrine that the happiness of the blessed is not perfectly complete until they recover their bodies . 
They lament in heaven , says our Brother Pedro Malón de Chaide of the Order of St. Augustine , a Spaniard and a Basque , -LSB- 17 -RSB- and `` this lament springs from their not being perfectly whole in heaven , for only the soul is there ; and although they can not suffer , because they see God , in whom they unspeakably delight , yet with all this it appears that they are not wholly content . 
They will be so when they are clothed with their own bodies . '' 
And to this central dogma of the resurrection in Christ and by Christ corresponds likewise a central sacrament , the axis of popular Catholic piety -- the Sacrament of the Eucharist . 
In it is administered the body of Christ , which is the bread of immortality . 
This sacrament is genuinely realist -- dinglich , as the Germans would say -- which may without great violence be translated `` material . '' 
It is the sacrament most genuinely ex opere operato , for which is substituted among Protestants the idealistic sacrament of the word . 
Fundamentally it is concerned with -- and I say it with all possible respect , but without wishing to sacrifice the expressiveness of the phrase -- the eating and drinking of God , the Eternalizer , the feeding upon Him . 
Little wonder then if St. Teresa tells us that when she was communicating in the monastery of the Incarnation and in the second year of her being Prioress there , on the octave of St. Martin , and the Father , Fr . 
Juan de la Cruz , divided the Host between her and another sister , she thought that it was done not because there was any want of Hosts , but because he wished to mortify her , `` for I had told him how much I delighted in Hosts of a large size . 
Yet I was not ignorant that the size of the Host is of no moment , for I knew that our Lord is whole and entire in the smallest particle . '' 
Here reason pulls one way , feeling another . 
And what importance for this feeling have the thousand and one difficulties that arise from reflecting rationally upon the mystery of this sacrament ? 
What is a divine body ? 
And the body , in so far as it is the body of Christ , is it divine ? 
What is an immortal and immortalizing body ? 
What is substance separated from the accidents ? 
Nowadays we have greatly refined our notion of materiality and substantiality ; but there were even some among the Fathers of the Church to whom the immateriality of God Himself was not a thing so clear and definite as it is for us . 
And this sacrament of the Eucharist is the immortalizing sacrament par excellence , and therefore the axis of popular Catholic piety , and if it may be so said , the most specifically religious of sacraments . 
For what is specific in the Catholic religion is immortalization and not justification , in the Protestant sense . 
Rather is this latter ethical . 
It was from Kant , in spite of what orthodox Protestants may think of him , that Protestantism derived its penultimate conclusions -- namely , that religion rests upon morality , and not morality upon religion , as in Catholicism . 
The preoccupation of sin has never been such a matter of anguish , or at any rate has never displayed itself with such an appearance of anguish , among Catholics . 
The sacrament of Confession contributes to this . 
And there persists , perhaps , among Catholics more than among Protestants the substance of the primitive Judaic and pagan conception of sin as something material and infectious and hereditary , which is cured by baptism and absolution . 
In Adam all his posterity sinned , almost materially , and his sin was transmitted as a material disease is transmitted . 
Renan , whose education was Catholic , was right , therefore , in calling to account the Protestant Amiel who accused him of not giving due importance to sin . 
And , on the other hand , Protestantism , absorbed in this preoccupation with justification , which in spite of its religious guise was taken more in an ethical sense than anything else , ends by neutralizing and almost obliterating eschatology ; it abandons the Nicene symbol , falls into an anarchy of creeds , into pure religious individualism and a vague esthetic , ethical , or cultured religiosity . 
What we may call `` other-worldliness '' -LRB- Jenseitigkeit -RRB- was obliterated little by little by `` this-worldliness '' -LRB- Diesseitigkeit -RRB- ; and this in spite of Kant , who wished to save it , but by destroying it . 
To its earthly vocation and passive trust in God is due the religious coarseness of Lutheranism , which was almost at the point of expiring in the age of the Enlightenment , of the Aufklärung , and which pietism , infusing into it something of the religious sap of Catholicism , barely succeeded in galvanizing a little . 
Hence the exactness of the remarks of Oliveira Martins in his magnificent History of Iberian Civilization , in which he says -LRB- book iv. , chap , iii . -RRB- 
that `` Catholicism produced heroes and Protestantism produced societies that are sensible , happy , wealthy , free , as far as their outer institutions go , but incapable of any great action , because their religion has begun by destroying in the heart of man all that made him capable of daring and noble self-sacrifice . '' 
Take any of the dogmatic systems that have resulted from the latest Protestant dissolvent analysis -- that of Kaftan , the follower of Ritschl , for example -- and note the extent to which eschatology is reduced . 
And his master , Albrecht Ritschl , himself says : `` The question regarding the necessity of justification or forgiveness can only be solved by conceiving eternal life as the direct end and aim of that divine operation . 
But if the idea of eternal life be applied merely to our state in the next life , then its content , too , lies beyond all experience , and can not form the basis of knowledge of a scientific kind . 
Hopes and desires , though marked by the strongest subjective certainty , are not any the clearer for that , and contain in themselves no guarantee of the completeness of what one hopes or desires . 
Clearness and completeness of idea , however , are the conditions of comprehending anything -- i.e. , of understanding the necessary connection between the various elements of a thing , and between the thing and its given presuppositions . 
The Evangelical article of belief , therefore , that justification by faith establishes or brings with it assurance of eternal life , is of no use theologically , so long as this purposive aspect of justification can not be verified in such experience as is possible now '' -LRB- Rechtfertigung und Versöhnung , vol . 
iii. , chap . 
vii. , 52 -RRB- . 
All this is very rational , but ... In the first edition of Melanchthon 's Loci Communes , that of 1521 , the first Lutheran theological work , its author omits all Trinitarian and Christological speculations , the dogmatic basis of eschatology . 
And Dr. Hermann , professor at Marburg , the author of a book on the Christian 's commerce with God -LRB- Der Verkehr des Christen mit Gott -RRB- -- a book the first chapter of which treats of the opposition between mysticism and the Christian religion , and which is , according to Harnack , the most perfect Lutheran manual -- tells us in another place , -LSB- 18 -RSB- referring to this Christological -LRB- or Athanasian -RRB- speculation , that `` the effective knowledge of God and of Christ , in which knowledge faith lives , is something entirely different . 
Nothing ought to find a place in Christian doctrine that is not capable of helping man to recognize his sins , to obtain the grace of God , and to serve Him in truth . 
Until that time -- that is to say , until Luther -- the Church had accepted much as doctrina sacra which can not absolutely contribute to confer upon man liberty of heart and tranquillity of conscience . '' 
For my part , I can not conceive the liberty of a heart or the tranquillity of a conscience that are not sure of their perdurability after death . 
`` The desire for the soul 's salvation , '' Hermann continues , `` must at last have led men to the knowledge and understanding of the effective doctrine of salvation . '' 
And in his book on the Christian 's commerce with God , this eminent Lutheran doctor is continually discoursing upon trust in God , peace of conscience , and an assurance of salvation that is not strictly and precisely certainty of everlasting life , but rather certainty of the forgiveness of sins . 
And I have read in a Protestant theologian , Ernst Troeltsch , that in the conceptual order Protestantism has attained its highest reach in music , in which art Bach has given it its mightiest artistic expression . 
This , then , is what Protestantism dissolves into -- celestial music ! 
-LSB- 19 -RSB- On the other hand we may say that the highest artistic expression of Catholicism , or at least of Spanish Catholicism , is in the art that is most material , tangible , and permanent -- for the vehicle of sounds is air -- in sculpture and painting , in the Christ of Velasquez , that Christ who is for ever dying , yet never finishes dying , in order that he may give us life . 
And yet Catholicism does not abandon ethics . 
No ! 
No modern religion can leave ethics on one side . 
But our religion -- although its doctors may protest against this -- is fundamentally and for the most part a compromise between eschatology and ethics ; it is eschatology pressed into the service of ethics . 
What else but this is that atrocity of the eternal pains of hell , which agrees so ill with the Pauline apocatastasis ? 
Let us bear in mind those words which the Theologica Germanica , the manual of mysticism that Luther read , puts into the mouth of God : `` If I must recompense your evil , I must recompense it with good , for I am and have none other . '' 
And Christ said : `` Father , forgive them , for they know not what they do , '' and there is no man who perhaps knows what he does . 
But it has been necessary , for the benefit of the social order , to convert religion into a kind of police system , and hence hell . 
Oriental or Greek Christianity is predominantly eschatological , Protestantism predominantly ethical , and Catholicism is a compromise between the two , although with the eschatological element preponderating . 
The most authentic Catholic ethic , monastic asceticism , is an ethic of eschatology , directed to the salvation of the individual soul rather than to the maintenance of society . 
And in the cult of virginity may there not perhaps be a certain obscure idea that to perpetuate ourselves in others hinders our own personal perpetuation ? 
The ascetic morality is a negative morality . 
And , strictly , what is important for a man is not to die , whether he sins or not . 
It is not necessary to take very literally , but as a lyrical , or rather rhetorical , effusion , the words of our famous sonnet -- No me mueve , mi Dios , para quererte el cielo que me tienes prometido , -LSB- 20 -RSB- and the rest that follows . 
The real sin -- perhaps it is the sin against the Holy Ghost for which there is no remission -- is the sin of heresy , the sin of thinking for oneself . 
The saying has been heard before now , here in Spain , that to be a liberal -- that is , a heretic -- is worse than being an assassin , a thief , or an adulterer . 
The gravest sin is not to obey the Church , whose infallibility protects us from reason . 
And why be scandalized by the infallibility of a man , of the Pope ? 
What difference does it make whether it be a book that is infallible -- the Bible , or a society of men -- the Church , or a single man ? 
Does it make any essential change in the rational difficulty ? 
And since the infallibility of a book or of a society of men is not more rational than that of a single man , this supreme offence in the eyes of reason had to be posited . 
It is the vital asserting itself , and in order to assert itself it creates , with the help of its enemy , the rational , a complete dogmatic structure , and this the Church defends against rationalism , against Protestantism , and against Modernism . 
The Church defends life . 
It stood up against Galileo , and it did right ; for his discovery , in its inception and until it became assimilated to the general body of human knowledge , tended to shatter the anthropomorphic belief that the universe was created for man . 
It opposed Darwin , and it did right , for Darwinism tends to shatter our belief that man is an exceptional animal , created expressly to be eternalized . 
And lastly , Pius IX. , the first Pontiff to be proclaimed infallible , declared that he was irreconcilable with the so-called modern civilization . 
And he did right . 
Loisy , the Catholic ex-abbé , said : `` I say simply this , that the Church and theology have not looked with favour upon the scientific movement , and that on certain decisive occasions , so far as it lay in their power , they have hindered it . 
I say , above all , that Catholic teaching has not associated itself with , or accommodated itself to , this movement . 
Theology has conducted itself , and conducts itself still , as if it were self-possessed of a science of nature and a science of history , together with that general philosophy of nature and history which results from a scientific knowledge of them . 
It might be supposed that the domain of theology and that of science , distinct in principle and even as defined by the Vatican Council , must not be distinct in practice . 
Everything proceeds almost as if theology had nothing to learn from modern science , natural or historical , and as if by itself it had the power and the right to exercise a direct and absolute control over all the activities of the human mind '' -LRB- Autour d'un Petit Livre , 1903 , p. 211 -RRB- . 
And such must needs be , and such in fact is , the Church 's attitude in its struggle with Modernism , of which Loisy was the learned and leading exponent . 
The recent struggle against Kantian and fideist Modernism is a struggle for life . 
Is it indeed possible for life , life that seeks assurance of survival , to tolerate that a Loisy , a Catholic priest , should affirm that the resurrection of the Saviour is not a fact of the historical order , demonstrable and demonstrated by the testimony of history alone ? 
Read , moreover , the exposition of the central dogma , that of the resurrection of Jesus , in E. Le Roy 's excellent work , Dogme et Critique , and tell me if any solid ground is left for our hope to build on . 
Do not the Modernists see that the question at issue is not so much that of the immortal life of Christ , reduced , perhaps , to a life in the collective Christian consciousness , as that of a guarantee of our own personal resurrection of body as well as soul ? 
This new psychological apologetic appeals to the moral miracle , and we , like the Jews , seek for a sign , something that can be taken hold of with all the powers of the soul and with all the senses of the body . 
And with the hands and the feet and the mouth , if it be possible . 
But alas ! 
we do not get it . 
Reason attacks , and faith , which does not feel itself secure without reason , has to come to terms with it . 
And hence come those tragic contradictions and lacerations of consciousness . 
We need security , certainty , signs , and they give us motiva credibilitatis -- motives of credibility -- upon which to establish the rationale obsequium , and although faith precedes reason -LRB- fides præcedit rationem -RRB- , according to St. Augustine , this same learned doctor and bishop sought to travel by faith to understanding -LRB- per fidem ad intellectum -RRB- , and to believe in order to understand -LRB- credo ut intelligam -RRB- . 
How far is this from that superb expression of Tertullian -- et sepultus resurrexit , certum est quia impossibile est ! 
-- `` and he was buried and rose again ; it is certain because it is impossible ! '' 
and his sublime credo quia absurdum ! 
-- the scandal of the rationalists . 
How far from the il faut s ` abêtir of Pascal and from the `` human reason loves the absurd '' of our Donoso Cortés , which he must have learned from the great Joseph de Maistre ! 
And a first foundation-stone was sought in the authority of tradition and the revelation of the word of God , and the principle of unanimous consent was arrived at . 
Quod apud multos unum invenitur , non est erratum , sed traditum , said Tertullian ; and Lamennais added , centuries later , that `` certitude , the principle of life and intelligence ... is , if I may be allowed the expression , a social product . '' 
-LSB- 21 -RSB- But here , as in so many cases , the supreme formula was given by that great Catholic , whose Catholicism was of the popular and vital order , Count Joseph de Maistre , when he wrote : `` I do not believe that it is possible to show a single opinion of universal utility that is not true . '' 
-LSB- 22 -RSB- Here you have the Catholic hall-mark -- the deduction of the truth of a principle from its supreme goodness or utility . 
And what is there of greater , of more sovereign utility , than the immortality of the soul ? 
`` As all is uncertain , either we must believe all men or none , '' said Lactantius ; but that great mystic and ascetic , Blessed Heinrich Seuse , the Dominican , implored the Eternal Wisdom for one word affirming that He was love , and when the answer came , `` All creatures proclaim that I am love , '' Seuse replied , `` Alas ! 
Lord , that does not suffice for a yearning soul . '' 
Faith feels itself secure neither with universal consent , nor with tradition , nor with authority . 
It seeks the support of its enemy , reason . 
And thus scholastic theology was devised , and with it its handmaiden -- ancilla theologiæ -- scholastic philosophy , and this handmaiden turned against her mistress . 
Scholasticism , a magnificent cathedral , in which all the problems of architectonic mechanism were resolved for future ages , but a cathedral constructed of unbaked bricks , gave place little by little to what is called natural theology and is merely Christianity depotentialized . 
The attempt was even made , where it was possible , to base dogmas upon reason , to show at least that if they were indeed super-rational they were not contra-rational , and they were reinforced with a philosophical foundation of Aristotelian-Neoplatonic thirteenth-century philosophy . 
And such is the Thomism recommended by Leo XIII . 
And now the question is not one of the enforcement of dogma but of its philosophical , medieval , and Thomist interpretation . 
It is not enough to believe that in receiving the consecrated Host we receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ ; we must needs negotiate all those difficulties of transubstantiation and substance separated from accidents , and so break with the whole of the modern rational conception of substantiality . 
But for this , implicit faith suffices -- the faith of the coalheaver , -LSB- 23 -RSB- the faith of those who , like St. Teresa -LRB- Vida , cap . 
xxv . 
2 -RRB- , do not wish to avail themselves of theology . 
`` Do not ask me the reason of that , for I am ignorant ; Holy Mother Church possesses doctors who will know how to answer you , '' as we were made to learn in the Catechism . 
It was for this , among other things , that the priesthood was instituted , that the teaching Church might be the depositary -- `` reservoir instead of river , '' as Phillips Brooks said -- of theological secrets . 
`` The work of the Nicene Creed , '' says Harnack -LRB- Dogmengeschichte , ii . 
1 , cap . 
vii . 
3 -RRB- , `` was a victory of the priesthood over the faith of the Christian people . 
The doctrine of the Logos had already become unintelligible to those who were not theologians . 
The setting up of the Niceno-Cappadocian formula as the fundamental confession of the Church made it perfectly impossible for the Catholic laity to get an inner comprehension of the Christian Faith , taking as their guide the form in which it was presented in the doctrine of the Church . 
The idea became more and more deeply implanted in men 's minds that Christianity was the revelation of the unintelligible . '' 
And so , in truth , it is . 
And why was this ? 
Because faith -- that is , Life -- no longer felt sure of itself . 
Neither traditionalism nor the theological positivism of Duns Scotus sufficed for it ; it sought to rationalize itself . 
And it sought to establish its foundation -- not , indeed , over against reason , where it really is , but upon reason -- that is to say , within reason -- itself . 
The nominalist or positivist or voluntarist position of Scotus -- that which maintains that law and truth depend , not so much upon the essence as upon the free and inscrutable will of God -- by accentuating its supreme irrationality , placed religion in danger among the majority of believers endowed with mature reason and not mere coalheavers . 
Hence the triumph of the Thomist theological rationalism . 
It is no longer enough to believe in the existence of God ; but the sentence of anathema falls on him who , though believing in it , does not believe that His existence is demonstrable by rational arguments , or who believes that up to the present nobody by means of these rational arguments has ever demonstrated it irrefutably . 
However , in this connection the remark of Pohle is perhaps capable of application : `` If eternal salvation depended upon mathematical axioms , we should have to expect that the most odious human sophistry would attack their universal validity as violently as it now attacks God , the soul , and Christ . '' 
-LSB- 24 -RSB- The truth is , Catholicism oscillates between mysticism , which is the inward experience of the living God in Christ , an intransmittible experience , the danger of which , however , is that it absorbs our own personality in God , and so does not save our vital longing -- between mysticism and the rationalism which it fights against -LRB- see Weizsäcker , op . 
cit . -RRB- 
; it oscillates between religionized science and scientificized religion . 
The apocalyptic enthusiasm changed little by little into neo-platonic mysticism , which theology thrust further into the background . 
It feared the excesses of the imagination which was supplanting faith and creating gnostic extravagances . 
But it had to sign a kind of pact with gnosticism and another with rationalism ; neither imagination nor reason allowed itself to be completely vanquished . 
And thus the body of Catholic dogma became a system of contradictions , more or less successfully harmonized . 
The Trinity was a kind of pact between monotheism and polytheism , and humanity and divinity sealed a peace in Christ , nature covenanted with grace , grace with free will , free will with the Divine prescience , and so on . 
And it is perhaps true , as Hermann says -LRB- loc . 
cit . -RRB- 
, that `` as soon as we develop religious thought to its logical conclusions , it enters into conflict with other ideas which belong equally to the life of religion . '' 
And this it is that gives to Catholicism its profound vital dialectic . 
But at what a cost ? 
At the cost , it must needs be said , of doing violence to the mental exigencies of those believers in possession of an adult reason . 
It demands from them that they shall believe all or nothing , that they shall accept the complete totality of dogma or that they shall forfeit all merit if the least part of it be rejected . 
And hence the result , as the great Unitarian preacher Channing pointed out , -LSB- 25 -RSB- that in France and Spain there are multitudes who have proceeded from rejecting Popery to absolute atheism , because `` the fact is , that false and absurd doctrines , when exposed , have a natural tendency to beget scepticism in those who received them without reflection . 
None are so likely to believe too little as those who have begun by believing too much . '' 
Here is , indeed , the terrible danger of believing too much . 
But no ! 
the terrible danger comes from another quarter -- from seeking to believe with the reason and not with life . 
The Catholic solution of our problem , of our unique vital problem , the problem of the immortality and eternal salvation of the individual soul , satisfies the will , and therefore satisfies life ; but the attempt to rationalize it by means of dogmatic theology fails to satisfy the reason . 
And reason has its exigencies as imperious as those of life . 
It is no use seeking to force ourselves to consider as super-rational what clearly appears to us to be contra-rational , neither is it any good wishing to become coalheavers when we are not coalheavers . 
Infallibility , a notion of Hellenic origin , is in its essence a rationalistic category . 
Let us now consider the rationalist or scientific solution -- or , more properly , dissolution -- of our problem . 
The great master of rationalist phenomenalism , David Hume , begins his essay `` On the Immortality of the Soul '' with these decisive words : `` It appears difficult by the mere light of reason to prove the immortality of the soul . 
The arguments in favour of it are commonly derived from metaphysical , moral , or physical considerations . 
But it is really the Gospel , and only the Gospel , that has brought to light life and immortality . '' 
Which is equivalent to denying the rationality of the belief that the soul of each one of us is immortal . 
Kant , whose criticism found its point of departure in Hume , attempted to establish the rationality of this longing for immortality and the belief that it imports ; and this is the real origin , the inward origin , of his Critique of Practical Reason , and of his categorical imperative and of his God . 
But in spite of all this , the sceptical affirmation of Hume holds good . 
There is no way of proving the immortality of the soul rationally . 
There are , on the other hand , ways of proving rationally its mortality . 
It would be not merely superfluous but ridiculous to enlarge here upon the extent to which the individual human consciousness is dependent upon the physical organism , pointing out how it comes to birth by slow degrees according as the brain receives impressions from the outside world , how it is temporarily suspended during sleep , swoons , and other accidents , and how everything leads us to the rational conjecture that death carries with it the loss of consciousness . 
And just as before our birth we were not , nor have we any personal pre-natal memory , so after our death we shall cease to be . 
This is the rational position . 
The designation `` soul '' is merely a term used to denote the individual consciousness in its integrity and continuity ; and that this soul undergoes change , that in like manner as it is integrated so it is disintegrated , is a thing very evident . 
For Aristotle it was the substantial form of the body -- the entelechy , but not a substance . 
And more than one modern has called it an epiphenomenon -- an absurd term . 
The appellation phenomenon suffices . 
Rationalism -- and by rationalism I mean the doctrine that abides solely by reason , by objective truth -- is necessarily materialist . 
And let not idealists be scandalized thereby . 
The truth is -- it is necessary to be perfectly explicit in this matter -- that what we call materialism means for us nothing else but the doctrine which denies the immortality of the individual soul , the persistence of personal consciousness after death . 
In another sense it may be said that , as we know what matter is no more than we know what spirit is , and as matter is for us merely an idea , materialism is idealism . 
In fact , and as regards our problem -- the most vital , the only really vital problem -- it is all the same to say that everything is matter as to say that everything is idea , or that everything is energy , or whatever you please . 
Every monist system will always seem to us materialist . 
The immortality of the soul is saved only by the dualist systems -- those which teach that human consciousness is something substantially distinct and different from the other manifestations of phenomena . 
And reason is naturally monist . 
For it is the function of reason to understand and explain the universe , and in order to understand and explain it , it is in no way necessary for the soul to be an imperishable substance . 
For the purpose of explaining and understanding our psychic life , for psychology , the hypothesis of the soul is unnecessary . 
What was formerly called rational psychology , in opposition to empirical psychology , is not psychology but metaphysics , and very muddy metaphysics ; neither is it rational , but profoundly irrational , or rather contra-rational . 
The pretended rational doctrine of the substantiality and spirituality of the soul , with all the apparatus that accompanies it , is born simply of the necessity which men feel of grounding upon reason their inexpugnable longing for immortality and the subsequent belief in it . 
All the sophistries which aim at proving that the soul is substance , simple and incorruptible , proceed from this source . 
And further , the very concept of substance , as it was fixed and defined by scholasticism , a concept which does not bear criticism , is a theological concept , designed expressly to sustain faith in the immortality of the soul . 
William James , in the third of the lectures which he devoted to pragmatism in the Lowell Institute in Boston , in December , 1906 , and January , 1907 -LSB- 26 -RSB- -- the weakest thing in all the work of the famous American thinker , an extremely weak thing indeed -- speaks as follows : `` Scholasticism has taken the notion of substance from common sense and made it very technical and articulate . 
Few things would seem to have fewer pragmatic consequences for us than substances , cut off as we are from every contact with them . 
Yet in one case scholasticism has proved the importance of the substance-idea by treating it pragmatically . 
I refer to certain disputes about the mystery of the Eucharist . 
Substance here would appear to have momentous pragmatic value . 
Since the accidents of the wafer do not change in the Lord 's Supper , and yet it has become the very body of Christ , it must be that the change is in the substance solely . 
The bread-substance must have been withdrawn and the Divine substance substituted miraculously without altering the immediate sensible properties . 
But though these do not alter , a tremendous difference has been made -- no less a one than this , that we who take the sacrament now feed upon the very substance of Divinity . 
The substance-notion breaks into life , with tremendous effect , if once you allow that substances can separate from their accidents and exchange these latter . 
This is the only pragmatic application of the substance-idea with which I am acquainted ; and it is obvious that it will only be treated seriously by those who already believe in the ` real presence ' on independent grounds . '' 
Now , leaving on one side the question as to whether it is good theology -- and I do not say good reasoning because all this lies outside the sphere of reason -- to confound the substance of the body -- the body , not the soul -- of Christ with the very substance of Divinity -- that is to say , with God Himself -- it would appear impossible that one so ardently desirous of the immortality of the soul as William James , a man whose whole philosophy aims simply at establishing this belief on rational grounds , should not have perceived that the pragmatic application of the concept of substance to the doctrine of the Eucharistic transubstantiation is merely a consequence of its anterior application to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul . 
As I explained in the preceding chapter , the Sacrament of the Eucharist is simply the reflection of the belief in immortality ; it is , for the believer , the proof , by a mystical experience , that the soul is immortal and will enjoy God eternally . 
And the concept of substance was born , above all and before all , of the concept of the substantiality of the soul , and the latter was affirmed in order to confirm faith in the persistence of the soul after its separation from the body . 
Such was at the same time its first pragmatic application and its origin . 
And subsequently we have transferred this concept to external things . 
It is because I feel myself to be substance -- that is to say , permanent in the midst of my changes -- that I attribute substantiality to those agents exterior to me , which are also permanent in the midst of their changes -- just as the concept of force is born of my sensation of personal effort in putting a thing in motion . 
Read carefully in the first part of the Summa Theologica of St. Thomas Aquinas the first six articles of question lxxv. , which discuss whether the human soul is body , whether it is something self-subsistent , whether such also is the soul of the lower animals , whether the soul is the man , whether the soul is composed of matter and form , and whether it is incorruptible , and then say if all this is not subtly intended to support the belief that this incorruptible substantiality of the soul renders it capable of receiving from God immortality , for it is clear that as He created it when He implanted it in the body , as St. Thomas says , so at its separation from the body He could annihilate it . 
And as the criticism of these proofs has been undertaken a hundred times , it is unnecessary to repeat it here . 
Is it possible for the unforewarned reason to conclude that our soul is a substance from the fact that our consciousness of our identity -- and this within very narrow and variable limits -- persists through all the changes of our body ? 
We might as well say of a ship that put out to sea and lost first one piece of timber , which was replaced by another of the same shape and dimensions , then lost another , and so on with all her timbers , and finally returned to port the same ship , with the same build , the same sea-going qualities , recognizable by everybody as the same -- we might as well say of such a ship that it had a substantial soul . 
Is it possible for the unforewarned reason to infer the simplicity of the soul from the fact that we have to judge and unify our thoughts ? 
Thought is not one but complex , and for the reason the soul is nothing but the succession of co-ordinated states of consciousness . 
In books of psychology written from the spiritualist point of view , it is customary to begin the discussion of the existence of the soul as a simple substance , separable from the body , after this style : There is in me a principle which thinks , wills , and feels ... . 
Now this implies a begging of the question . 
For it is far from being an immediate truth that there is in me such a principle ; the immediate truth is that I think , will , and feel . 
And I -- the I that thinks , wills , and feels -- am immediately my living body with the states of consciousness which it sustains . 
It is my living body that thinks , wills , and feels . 
How ? 
How you please . 
And they proceed to seek to establish the substantiality of the soul , hypostatizing the states of consciousness , and they begin by saying that this substance must be simple -- that is , by opposing thought to extension , after the manner of the Cartesian dualism . 
And as Balmes was one of the spiritualist writers who have given the clearest and most concise form to the argument , I will present it as he expounds it in the second chapter of his Curso de Filosofia Elemental . 
`` The human soul is simple , '' he says , and adds : `` Simplicity consists in the absence of parts , and the soul has none . 
Let us suppose that it has three parts -- A , B , C. I ask , Where , then , does thought reside ? 
If in A only , then B and C are superfluous ; and consequently the simple subject A will be the soul . 
If thought resides in A , B , and C , it follows that thought is divided into parts , which is absurd . 
What sort of a thing is a perception , a comparison , a judgement , a ratiocination , distributed among three subjects ? '' 
A more obvious begging of the question can not be conceived . 
Balmes begins by taking it for granted that the whole , as a whole , is incapable of making a judgement . 
He continues : `` The unity of consciousness is opposed to the division of the soul . 
When we think , there is a subject which knows everything that it thinks , and this is impossible if parts be attributed to it . 
Of the thought that is in A , B and C will know nothing , and so in the other cases respectively . 
There will not , therefore , be one consciousness of the whole thought : each part will have its special consciousness , and there will be within us as many thinking beings as there are parts . '' 
The begging of the question continues ; it is assumed without any proof that a whole , as a whole , can not perceive as a unit . 
Balmes then proceeds to ask if these parts A , B , and C are simple or compound , and repeats his argument until he arrives at the conclusion that the thinking subject must be a part which is not a whole -- that is , simple . 
The argument is based , as will be seen , upon the unity of apperception and of judgement . 
Subsequently he endeavours to refute the hypothesis of a communication of the parts among themselves . 
Balmes -- and with him the a priori spiritualists who seek to rationalize faith in the immortality of the soul -- ignore the only rational explanation , which is that apperception and judgement are a resultant , that perceptions or ideas themselves are components which agree . 
They begin by supposing something external to and distinct from the states of consciousness , something that is not the living body which supports these states , something that is not I but is within me . 
The soul is simple , others say , because it reflects upon itself as a complete whole . 
No ; the state of consciousness A , in which I think of my previous state of consciousness B , is not the same as its predecessor . 
Or if I think of my soul , I think of an idea distinct from the act by which I think of it . 
To think that one thinks and nothing more , is not to think . 
The soul is the principle of life , it is said . 
Yes ; and similarly the category of force or energy has been conceived as the principle of movement . 
But these are concepts , not phenomena , not external realities . 
Does the principle of movement move ? 
And only that which moves has external reality . 
Does the principle of life live ? 
Hume was right when he said that he never encountered this idea of himself -- that he only observed himself desiring or performing or feeling something . 
-LSB- 27 -RSB- The idea of some individual thing -- of this inkstand in front of me , of that horse standing at my gate , of these two and not of any other individuals of the same class -- is the fact , the phenomenon itself . 
The idea of myself is myself . 
All the efforts to substantiate consciousness , making it independent of extension -- remember that Descartes opposed thought to extension -- are but sophistical subtilties intended to establish the rationality of faith in the immortality of the soul . 
It is sought to give the value of objective reality to that which does not possess it -- to that whose reality exists only in thought . 
And the immortality that we crave is a phenomenal immortality -- it is the continuation of this present life . 
The unity of consciousness is for scientific psychology -- the only rational psychology -- simply a phenomenal unity . 
No one can say what a substantial unity is . 
And , what is more , no one can say what a substance is . 
For the notion of substance is a non-phenomenal category . 
It is a noumenon and belongs properly to the unknowable -- that is to say , according to the sense in which it is understood . 
But in its transcendental sense it is something really unknowable and strictly irrational . 
It is precisely this concept of substance that an unforewarned mind reduces to a use that is very far from that pragmatic application to which William James referred . 
And this application is not saved by understanding it in an idealistic sense , according to the Berkeleyan principle that to be is to be perceived -LRB- esse est percipi -RRB- . 
To say that everything is idea or that everything is spirit , is the same as saying that everything is matter or that everything is energy , for if everything is idea or everything spirit , and if , therefore , this diamond is idea or spirit , just as my consciousness is , it is not plain why the diamond should not endure for ever , if my consciousness , because it is idea or spirit , endures for ever . 
George Berkeley , Anglican Bishop of Cloyne and brother in spirit to the Anglican bishop Joseph Butler , was equally as anxious to save the belief in the immortality of the soul . 
In the first words of the Preface to his Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge , he tells us that he considers that this treatise will be useful , `` particularly to those who are tainted with scepticism , or want a demonstration of the existence and immateriality of God , or the natural immortality of the soul . '' 
In paragraph cxl . 
he lays it down that we have an idea , or rather a notion , of spirit , and that we know other spirits by means of our own , from which follows -- so in the next paragraph he roundly affirms -- the natural immortality of the soul . 
And here he enters upon a series of confusions arising from the ambiguity with which he invests the term notion . 
And after having established the immortality of the soul , almost as it were per saltum , on the ground that the soul is not passive like the body , he proceeds to tell us in paragraph cxlvii . 
that the existence of God is more evident than that of man . 
And yet , in spite of this , there are still some who are doubtful ! 
The question was complicated by making consciousness a property of the soul , consciousness being something more than soul -- that is to say , a substantial form of the body , the originator of all the organic functions of the body . 
The soul not only thinks , feels , and wills , but moves the body and prompts its vital functions ; in the human soul are united the vegetative , animal , and rational functions . 
Such is the theory . 
But the soul separated from the body can have neither vegetative nor animal functions . 
A theory , in short , which for the reason is a veritable contexture of confusions . 
After the Renaissance and the restoration of purely rational thought , emancipated from all theology , the doctrine of the mortality of the soul was re-established by the newly published writings of the second-century philosopher Alexander of Aphrodisias and by Pietro Pomponazzi and others . 
And in point of fact , little or nothing can be added to what Pomponazzi has written in his Tractatus de immortalitate animæ . 
It is reason itself , and it serves nothing to reiterate his arguments . 
Attempts have not been wanting , however , to find an empirical support for belief in the immortality of the soul , and among these may be counted the work of Frederic W.H. Myers on Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death . 
No one ever approached more eagerly than myself the two thick volumes of this work in which the leading spirit of the Society for Psychical Research resumed that formidable mass of data relating to presentiments , apparitions of the dead , the phenomena of dreams , telepathy , hypnotism , sensorial automatism , ecstasy , and all the rest that goes to furnish the spiritualist arsenal . 
I entered upon the reading of it not only without that temper of cautious suspicion which men of science maintain in investigations of this character , but even with a predisposition in its favour , as one who comes to seek the confirmation of his innermost longings ; but for this reason was my disillusion all the greater . 
In spite of its critical apparatus it does not differ in any respect from medieval miracle-mongering . 
There is a fundamental defect of method , of logic . 
And if the belief in the immortality of the soul has been unable to find vindication in rational empiricism , neither is it satisfied with pantheism . 
