And this personalization of the all , of the Universe , to which we are led by love , by pity , is the personalization of a person who embraces and comprehends within himself the other persons of which he is composed . 
The only way to give finality to the world is to give it consciousness . 
For where there is no consciousness there is no finality , finality presupposing a purpose . 
And , as we shall see , faith in God is based simply upon the vital need of giving finality to existence , of making it answer to a purpose . 
We need God , not in order to understand the why , but in order to feel and sustain the ultimate wherefore , to give a meaning to the Universe . 
And neither ought we to be surprised by the affirmation that this consciousness of the Universe is composed and integrated by the consciousnesses of the beings which form the Universe , by the consciousnesses of all the beings that exist , and that nevertheless it remains a personal consciousness distinct from those which compose it . 
Only thus is it possible to understand how in God we live , move , and have our being . 
That great visionary , Emanuel Swedenborg , saw or caught a glimpse of this in his book on Heaven and Hell -LRB- De Coelo et Inferno , lii . -RRB- 
, when he tells us : `` An entire angelic society appears sometimes in the form of a single angel , which also it hath been granted me by the Lord to see . 
When the Lord Himself appears in the midst of the angels , He doth not appear as encompassed by a multitude , but as a single being in angelic form . 
Hence it is that the Lord in the Word is called an angel , and likewise that on entire society is so called . 
Michael , Gabriel , and Raphael are nothing but angelical societies , which are so named from their functions . '' 
May we not perhaps live and love -- that is , suffer and pity -- in this all-enveloping Supreme Person -- we , all the persons who suffer and pity and all the beings that strive to achieve personality , to acquire consciousness of their suffering and their limitation ? 
And are we not , perhaps , ideas of this total Grand Consciousness , which by thinking of us as existing confers existence upon us ? 
Does not our existence consist in being perceived and felt by God ? 
And , further on , this same visionary tells us , under the form of images , that each angel , each society of angels , and the whole of heaven comprehensively surveyed , appear in human form , and in virtue of this human form the Lord rules them as one man . 
`` God does not think , He creates ; He does not exist , He is eternal , '' wrote Kierkegaard -LRB- Afslutende uvidens-kabelige Efterskrift -RRB- ; but perhaps it is more exact to say with Mazzini , the mystic of the Italian city , that `` God is great because His thought is action '' -LRB- Ai giovani d'ltalia -RRB- , because with Him to think is to create , and He gives existence to that which exists in His thought by the mere fact of thinking it , and the impossible is the unthinkable by God . 
Is it not written in the Scriptures that God creates with His word -- that is to say , with His thought -- and that by this , by His Word , He made everything that exists ? 
And what God has once made does He ever forget ? 
May it not be that all the thoughts that have ever passed through the Supreme Consciousness still subsist therein ? 
In Him , who is eternal , is not all existence eternalized ? 
Our longing to save consciousness , to give personal and human finality to the Universe and to existence , is such that even in the midst of a supreme , an agonizing and lacerating sacrifice , we should still hear the voice that assured us that if our consciousness disappears , it is that the infinite and eternal Consciousness may be enriched thereby , that our souls may serve as nutriment to the Universal Soul . 
Yes , I enrich God , because before I existed He did not think of me as existing , because I am one more -- one more even though among an infinity of others -- who , having really lived , really suffered , and really loved , abide in His bosom . 
It is the furious longing to give finality to the Universe , to make it conscious and personal , that has brought us to believe in God , to wish that God may exist , to create God , in a word . 
To create Him , yes ! 
This saying ought not to scandalize even the most devout theist . 
For to believe in God is , in a certain sense , to create Him , although He first creates us . 
-LSB- 37 -RSB- It is He who in us is continually creating Himself . 
We have created God in order to save the Universe from nothingness , for all that is not consciousness and eternal consciousness , conscious of its eternity and eternally conscious , is nothing more than appearance . 
There is nothing truly real save that which feels , suffers , pities , loves , and desires , save consciousness ; there is nothing substantial but consciousness . 
And we need God in order to save consciousness ; not in order to think existence , but in order to live it ; not in order to know the why and how of it , but in order to feel the wherefore of it . 
Love is a contradiction if there is no God . 
Let us now consider this idea of God , of the logical God or the Supreme Reason , and of the vital God or the God of the heart -- that is , Supreme Love . 
To affirm that the religious sense is a sense of divinity and that it is impossible without some abuse of the ordinary usages of human language to speak of an atheistic religion , is not , I think , to do violence to the truth ; although it is clear that everything will depend upon the concept that we form of God , a concept which in its turn depends upon the concept of divinity . 
Our proper procedure , in effect , will be to begin with this sense of divinity , before prefixing to the concept of this quality the definite article and the capital letter and so converting it into `` the Divinity '' -- that is , into God . 
For man has not deduced the divine from God , but rather he has reached God through the divine . 
In the course of these somewhat wandering but at the same time urgent reflections upon the tragic sense of life , I have already alluded to the timor fecit deos of Statius with the object of limiting and correcting it . 
It is not my intention to trace yet once again the historical processes by which peoples have arrived at the consciousness and concept of a personal God like the God of Christianity . 
And I say peoples and not isolated individuals , for if there is any feeling or concept that is truly collective and social it is the feeling and concept of God , although the individual subsequently individualizes it . 
Philosophy may , and in fact does , possess an individual origin ; theology is necessarily collective . 
Schleiermacher 's theory , which attributes the origin , or rather the essence , of the religious sense to the immediate and simple feeling of dependency , appears to be the most profound and exact explanation . 
Primitive man , living in society , feels himself to be dependent upon the mysterious forces invisibly environing him ; he feels himself to be in social communion , not only with beings like himself , his fellow-men , but with the whole of Nature , animate and inanimate , which simply means , in other words , that he personalizes everything . 
Not only does he possess a consciousness of the world , but he imagines that the world , like himself , possesses consciousness also . 
Just as a child talks to his doll or his dog as if it understood what he was saying , so the savage believes that his fetich hears him when he speaks to it , and that the angry storm-cloud is aware of him and deliberately pursues him . 
For the newly born mind of the primitive natural man has not yet wholly severed itself from the cords which still bind it to the womb of Nature , neither has it clearly marked out the boundary that separates dreaming from waking , imagination from reality . 
The divine , therefore , was not originally something objective , but was rather the subjectivity of consciousness projected exteriorly , the personalization of the world . 
The concept of divinity arose out of the feeling of divinity , and the feeling of divinity is simply the dim and nascent feeling of personality vented upon the outside world . 
And strictly speaking it is not possible to speak of outside and inside , objective and subjective , when no such distinction was actually felt ; indeed it is precisely from this lack of distinction that the feeling and concept of divinity proceed . 
The clearer our consciousness of the distinction between the objective and the subjective , the more obscure is the feeling of divinity in us . 
It has been said , and very justly so it would appear , that Hellenic paganism was not so much polytheistic as pantheistic . 
I do not know that the belief in a multitude of gods , taking the concept of God in the sense in which we understand it to-day , has ever really existed in any human mind . 
And if by pantheism is understood the doctrine , not that everything and each individual thing is God -- a proposition which I find unthinkable -- but that everything is divine , then it may be said without any great abuse of language that paganism was pantheistic . 
Its gods not only mixed among men but intermixed with them ; they begat gods upon mortal women and upon goddesses mortal men begat demi-gods . 
And if demi-gods , that is , demi-men , were believed to exist , it was because the divine and the human were viewed as different aspects of the same reality . 
The divinization of everything was simply its humanization . 
To say that the sun was a god was equivalent to saying that it was a man , a human consciousness , more or less , aggrandized and sublimated . 
And this is true of all beliefs from fetichism to Hellenic paganism . 
The real distinction between gods and men consisted in the fact that the former were immortal . 
A god came to be identical with an immortal man and a man was deified , reputed as a god , when it was deemed that at his death he had not really died . 
Of certain heroes it was believed that they were alive in the kingdom of the dead . 
And this is a point of great importance in estimating the value of the concept of the divine . 
In those republics of gods there was always some predominating god , some real monarch . 
It was through the agency of this divine monarchy that primitive peoples were led from monocultism to monotheism . 
Hence monarchy and monotheism are twin brethren . 
Zeus , Jupiter , was in process of being converted into an only god , just as Jahwé originally one god among many others , came to be converted into an only god , first the god of the people of Israel , then the god of humanity , and finally the god of the whole universe . 
Like monarchy , monotheism had a martial origin . 
`` It is only on the march and in time of war , '' says Robertson Smith in The Prophets of Israel , -LSB- 38 -RSB- `` that a nomad people feels any urgent need of a central authority , and so it came about that in the first beginnings of national organization , centring in the sanctuary of the ark , Israel was thought of mainly as the host of Jehovah . 
The very name of Israel is martial , and means ` God -LRB- El -RRB- fighteth , ' and Jehovah in the Old Testament is Iahwè Çebäôth -- the Jehovah of the armies of Israel . 
It was on the battlefield that Jehovah 's presence was most clearly realized ; but in primitive nations the leader in time of war is also the natural judge in time of peace . '' 
God , the only God , issued , therefore , from man 's sense of divinity as a warlike , monarchical and social God . 
He revealed himself to the people as a whole , not to the individual . 
He was the God of a people and he jealously exacted that worship should be rendered to him alone . 
The transition from this monocultism to monotheism was effected largely by the individual action , more philosophical perhaps than theological , of the prophets . 
It was , in fact , the individual activity of the prophets that individualized the divinity . 
And above all by making the divinity ethical . 
Subsequently reason -- that is , philosophy -- took possession of this God who had arisen in the human consciousness as a consequence of the sense of divinity in man , and tended to define him and convert him into an idea . 
For to define a thing is to idealize it , a process which necessitates the abstraction from it of its incommensurable or irrational element , its vital essence . 
Thus the God of feeling , the divinity felt as a unique person and consciousness external to us , although at the same time enveloping and sustaining us , was converted into the idea of God . 
The logical , rational God , the ens summum , the primum movens , the Supreme Being of theological philosophy , the God who is reached by the three famous ways of negation , eminence and causality , viæ negationis , eminentiæ , causalitatis , is nothing but an idea of God , a dead thing . 
The traditional and much debated proofs of his existence are , at bottom , merely a vain attempt to determine his essence ; for as Vinet has very well observed , existence is deduced from essence ; and to say that God exists , without saying what God is and how he is , is equivalent to saying nothing at all . 
And this God , arrived at by the methods of eminence and negation or abstraction of finite qualities , ends by becoming an unthinkable God , a pure idea , a God of whom , by the very fact of his ideal excellence , we can say that he is nothing , as indeed he has been defined by Scotus Erigena : Deus propter excellentiam non inmerito nihil vocatur . 
Or in the words of the pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite , in his fifth Epistle , `` The divine darkness is the inaccessible light in which God is said to dwell . '' 
The anthropomorphic God , the God who is felt , in being purified of human , and as such finite , relative and temporal , attributes , evaporates into the God of deism or of pantheism . 
The traditional so-called proofs of the existence of God all refer to this God-Idea , to this logical God , the God by abstraction , and hence they really prove nothing , or rather , they prove nothing more than the existence of this idea of God . 
In my early youth , when first I began to be puzzled by these eternal problems , I read in a book , the author of which I have no wish to recall , -LSB- 39 -RSB- this sentence : `` God is the great X placed over the ultimate barrier of human knowledge ; in the measure in which science advances , the barrier recedes . '' 
And I wrote in the margin , `` On this side of the barrier , everything is explained without Him ; on the further side , nothing is explained , either with Him or without Him ; God therefore is superfluous . '' 
And so far as concerns the God-Idea , the God of the proofs , I continue to be of the same opinion . 
Laplace is said to have stated that he had not found the hypothesis of God necessary in order to construct his scheme of the origin of the Universe , and it is very true . 
In no way whatever does the idea of God help us to understand better the existence , the essence and the finality of the Universe . 
That there is a Supreme Being , infinite , absolute and eternal , whose existence is unknown to us , and who has created the Universe , is not more conceivable than that the material basis of the Universe itself , its matter , is eternal and infinite and absolute . 
We do not understand the existence of the world one whit the better by telling ourselves that God created it . 
It is a begging of the question , or a merely verbal solution , intended to cover up our ignorance . 
In strict truth , we deduce the existence of the Creator from the fact that the thing created exists , a process which does not justify rationally His existence . 
You can not deduce a necessity from a fact , or else everything were necessary . 
And if from the nature of the Universe we pass to what is called its order , which is supposed to necessitate an Ordainer , we may say that order is what there is , and we do not conceive of any other . 
This deduction of God 's existence from the order of the Universe implies a transition from the ideal to the real order , an outward projection of our mind , a supposition that the rational explanation of a thing produces the thing itself . 
Human art , instructed by Nature , possesses a conscious creative faculty , by means of which it apprehends the process of creation , and we proceed to transfer this conscious and artistic creative faculty to the consciousness of an artist-creator , but from what nature he in his turn learnt his art we can not tell . 
The traditional analogy of the watch and the watchmaker is inapplicable to a Being absolute , infinite and eternal . 
It is , moreover , only another way of explaining nothing . 
For to say that the world is as it is and not otherwise because God made it so , while at the same time we do not know for what reason He made it so , is to say nothing . 
And if we knew for what reason God made it so , then God is superfluous and the reason itself suffices . 
If everything were mathematics , if there were no irrational element , we should not have had recourse to this explanatory theory of a Supreme Ordainer , who is nothing but the reason of the irrational , and so merely another cloak for our ignorance . 
And let us not discuss here that absurd proposition that , if all the type in a printing-press were printed at random , the result could not possibly be the composition of Don Quixote . 
Something would be composed which would be as good as Don Quixote for those who would have to be content with it and would grow in it and would form part of it . 
In effect , this traditional supposed proof of God 's existence resolves itself fundamentally into hypostatizing or substantivating the explanation or reason of a phenomenon ; it amounts to saying that Mechanics is the cause of movement , Biology of life , Philology of language , Chemistry of bodies , by simply adding the capital letter to the science and converting it into a force distinct from the phenomena from which we derive it and distinct from our mind which effects the derivation . 
But the God who is the result of this process , a God who is nothing but reason hypostatized and projected towards the infinite , can not possibly be felt as something living and real , nor yet be conceived of save as a mere idea which will die with us . 
The question arises , on the other hand , whether a thing the idea of which has been conceived but which has no real existence , does not exist because God wills that it should not exist , or whether God does not will it to exist because , in fact , it does not exist ; and , with regard to the impossible , whether a thing is impossible because God wills it so , or whether God wills it so because , in itself and by the very fact of its own inherent absurdity , it is impossible . 
God has to submit to the logical law of contradiction , and He can not , according to the theologians , cause two and two to make either more or less than four . 
Either the law of necessity is above Him or He Himself is the law of necessity . 
And in the moral order the question arises whether falsehood , or homicide , or adultery , are wrong because He has so decreed it , or whether He has so decreed it because they are wrong . 
If the former , then God is a capricious and unreasonable God , who decrees one law when He might equally well have decreed another , or , if the latter , He obeys an intrinsic nature and essence which exists in things themselves independently of Him -- that is to say , independently of His sovereign will ; and if this is the case , if He obeys the innate reason of things , this reason , if we could but know it , would suffice us without any further need of God , and since we do not know it , God explains nothing . 
This reason would be above God . 
Neither is it of any avail to say that this reason is God Himself , the supreme reason of things . 
A reason of this kind , a necessary reason , is not a personal something . 
It is will that gives personality . 
And it is because of this problem of the relations between God 's reason , necessarily necessary , and His will , necessarily free , that the logical and Aristotelian God will always be a contradictory God . 
The scholastic theologians never succeeded in disentangling themselves from the difficulties in which they found themselves involved when they attempted to reconcile human liberty with divine prescience and with the knowledge that God possesses of the free and contingent future ; and that is strictly the reason why the rational God is wholly inapplicable to the contingent , for the notion of contingency is fundamentally the same as the notion of irrationality . 
The rational God is necessarily necessary in His being and in His working ; in every single case He can not do other than the best , and a number of different things can not all equally be the best , for among infinite possibilities there is only one that is best accommodated to its end , just as among the infinite number of lines that can be drawn from one point to another , there is only one straight line . 
And the rational God , the God of reason , can not but follow in each case the straight line , the line that leads most directly to the end proposed , a necessary end , just as the only straight line that leads to it is a necessary line . 
And thus for the divinity of God is substituted His necessity . 
And in the necessity of God , His free will -- that is to say , His conscious personality -- perishes . 
The God of our heart 's desire , the God who shall save our soul from nothingness , must needs be an arbitrary God . 
Not because He thinks can God be God , but because He works , because He creates ; He is not a contemplative but an active God . 
A God-Reason , a theoretical or contemplative God , such as is this God of theological rationalism , is a God that is diluted in His own contemplation . 
With this God corresponds , as we shall see , the beatific vision , understood as the supreme expression of human felicity . 
A quietist God , in short , as reason , by its very essence , is quietist . 
There remains the other famous proof of God 's existence , that of the supposed unanimous consent in a belief in Him among all peoples . 
But this proof is not strictly rational , neither is it an argument in favour of the rational God who explains the Universe , but of the God of the heart , who makes us live . 
We should be justified in calling it a rational proof only on the supposition that we believed that reason was identical with a more or less unanimous agreement among all peoples , that it corresponded with the verdict of a universal suffrage , only on the supposition that we held that vox populi , which is said to be vox Dei , was actually the voice of reason . 
Such was , indeed , the belief of Lamennais , that tragic and ardent spirit , who affirmed that life and truth were essentially one and the same thing -- would that they were ! 
-- and that reason was one , universal , everlasting and holy -LRB- Essai sur l'indifférence , partie iv. , chap , viii . -RRB- . 
He invoked the aut omnibus credendum est aut nemini of Lactantius -- we must believe all or none -- and the saying of Heraclitus that every individual opinion is fallible , and that of Aristotle that the strongest proof consists in the general agreement of mankind , and above all that of Pliny -LRB- Paneg . 
Trajani , lxii . -RRB- 
, to the effect that one man can not deceive all men or be deceived by all -- nemo omnes , neminem omnes fefellerunt . 
Would that it were so ! 
And so he concludes with the dictum of Cicero -LRB- De natura deorum , lib . 
iii. , cap . 
ii. , 5 and 6 -RRB- , that we must believe the tradition of our ancestors even though they fail to render us a reason -- maioribus autem nostris , etiam nulla ratione reddita credere . 
Let us suppose that this belief of the ancients in the divine interpenetration of the whole of Nature is universal and constant , and that it is , as Aristotle calls it , an ancestral dogma -LRB- patrios doxa -RRB- -LRB- Metaphysica , lib . 
vii. , cap . 
vii . -RRB- 
; this would prove only that there is a motive impelling peoples and individuals -- that is to say , all or almost all or a majority of them -- to believe in a God . 
But may it not be that there are illusions and fallacies rooted in human nature itself ? 
Do not all peoples begin by believing that the sun turns round the earth ? 
And do we not all naturally incline to believe that which satisfies our desires ? 
Shall we say with Hermann -LSB- 40 -RSB- that , `` if there is a God , He has not left us without some indication of Himself , and if is His will that we should find Him . '' 
A pious desire , no doubt , but we can not strictly call it a reason , unless we apply to it the Augustinian sentence , but which again is not a reason , `` Since thou seekest Me , it must be that thou hast found Me , '' believing that God is the cause of our seeking Him . 
This famous argument from the supposed unanimity of mankind 's belief in God , the argument which with a sure instinct was seized upon by the ancients , is in its essence identical with the so-called moral proof which Kant employed in his Critique of Practical Reason , transposing its application from mankind collectively to the individual , the proof which he derives from our conscience , or rather from our feeling of divinity . 
It is not a proof strictly or specifically rational , but vital ; it can not be applied to the logical God , the ens summum , the essentially simple and abstract Being , the immobile and impassible prime mover , the God-Reason , in a word , but to the biotic God , to the Being essentially complex and concrete , to the suffering God who suffers and desires in us and with us , to the Father of Christ who is only to be approached through Man , through His Son -LRB- John xiv . 
6 -RRB- , and whose revelation is historical , or if you like , anecdotical , but not philosophical or categorical . 
The unanimous consent of mankind -LRB- let us suppose the unanimity -RRB- or , in other words , this universal longing of all human souls who have arrived at the consciousness of their humanity , which desires to be the end and meaning of the Universe , this longing , which is nothing but that very essence of the soul which consists in its effort to persist eternally and without a break in the continuity of consciousness , leads us to the human , anthropomorphic God , the projection of our consciousness to the Consciousness of the Universe ; it leads us to the God who confers human meaning and finality upon the Universe and who is not the ens summum , the primum movens , nor the Creator of the Universe , nor merely the Idea-God . 
It leads us to the living , subjective God , for He is simply subjectivity objectified or personality universalized -- He is more than a mere idea , and He is will rather than reason . 
God is Love -- that is , Will . 
Reason , the Word , derives from Him , but He , the Father , is , above all , Will . 
`` There can be no doubt whatever , '' Ritschl says -LRB- Rechtfertigung und Versöhnung , iii. , chap . 
v. -RRB- , `` that a very imperfect view was taken of God 's spiritual personality in the older theology , when the functions of knowing and willing alone were employed to illustrate it . 
Religious thought plainly ascribes to God affections of feeling as well . 
The older theology , however , laboured under the impression that feeling and emotion were characteristic only of limited and created personality ; it transformed , e.g. , the religious idea of the Divine blessedness into eternal self-knowledge , and that of the Divine wrath into a fixed purpose to punish sin . '' 
Yes , this logical God , arrived at by the via negationis , was a God who , strictly speaking , neither loved nor hated , because He neither enjoyed nor suffered , an inhuman God , and His justice was a rational or mathematical justice -- that is , an injustice . 
The attributes of the living God , of the Father of Christ , must be deduced from His historical revelation in the Gospel and in the conscience of every Christian believer , and not from metaphysical reasonings which lead only to the Nothing-God of Scotus Erigena , to the rational or pantheistic God , to the atheist God -- in short , to the de-personalized Divinity . 
Not by the way of reason , but only by the way of love and of suffering , do we come to the living God , the human God . 
Reason rather separates us from Him . 
We can not first know Him in order that afterwards we may love Him ; we must begin by loving Him , longing for Him , hungering after Him , before knowing Him . 
The knowledge of God proceeds from the love of God , and this knowledge has little or nothing of the rational in it . 
For God is indefinable . 
To seek to define Him is to seek to confine Him within the limits of our mind -- that is to say , to kill Him . 
In so far as we attempt to define Him , there rises up before us -- Nothingness . 
The idea of God , formulated by a theodicy that claims to be rational , is simply an hypothesis , like the hypotheses of ether , for example . 
Ether is , in effect , a merely hypothetical entity , valuable only in so far as it explains that which by means of it we endeavour to explain -- light , electricity or universal gravitation -- and only in so far as these facts can not be explained in any other way . 
In like manner the idea of God is also an hypothesis , valuable only in so far as it enables us to explain that which by means of if we endeavour to explain -- the essence and existence of the Universe -- and only so long as these can not be explained in any other way . 
And since in reality we explain the Universe neither better nor worse with this idea than without it , the idea of God , the supreme petitio principii , is valueless . 
But if ether is nothing but an hypothesis explanatory of light , air , on the other hand , is a thing that is directly felt ; and even though it did not enable us to explain the phenomenon of sound , we should nevertheless always be directly aware of it , and , above all , of the lack of it in moments of suffocation or air-hunger . 
And in the same way God Himself , not the idea of God , may become a reality that is immediately felt ; and even though the idea of Him does not enable us to explain either the existence or the essence of the Universe , we have at times the direct feeling of God , above all in moments of spiritual suffocation . 
And this feeling -- mark it well , for all that is tragic in it and the whole tragic sense of life is founded upon this -- this feeling is a feeling of hunger for God , of the lack of God . 
To believe in God is , in the first instance , as we shall see , to wish that there may be a God , to be unable to live without Him . 
So long as I pilgrimaged through the fields of reason in search of God , I could not find Him , for I was not deluded by the idea of God , neither could I take an idea for God , and it was then , as I wandered among the wastes of rationalism , that I told myself that we ought to seek no other consolation than the truth , meaning thereby reason , and yet for all that I was not comforted . 
But as I sank deeper and deeper into rational scepticism on the one hand and into heart 's despair on the other , the hunger for God awoke within me , and the suffocation of spirit made me feel the want of God , and with the want of Him , His reality . 
And I wished that there might be a God , that God might exist . 
And God does not exist , but rather super-exists , and He is sustaining our existence , existing us -LRB- existiéndonos -RRB- . 
God , who is Love , the Father of Love , is the son of love in us . 
There are men of a facile and external habit of mind , slaves of reason , that reason which externalizes us , who think it a shrewd comment to say that so far from God having made man in His image and likeness , it is rather man who has made his gods or his God in his own image and likeness , -LSB- 41 -RSB- and so superficial are they that they do not pause to consider that if the second of these propositions be true , as in fact it is , it is owing to the fact that the first is not less true . 
God and man , in effect , mutually create one another ; God creates or reveals Himself in man and man creates himself in God . 
God is His own maker , Deus ipse se facit , said Lactantius -LRB- Divinarum Institutionum , ii. , 8 -RRB- , and we may say that He is making Himself continually both in man and by man . 
And if each of us , impelled by his love , by his hunger for divinity , creates for himself an image of God according to his own desire , and if according to His desire God creates Himself for each of us , then there is a collective , social , human God , the resultant of all the human imaginations that imagine Him . 
For God is and reveals Himself in collectivity . 
And God is the richest and most personal of human conceptions . 
The Master of divinity has bidden us be perfect as our Father who is in heaven is perfect -LRB- Matt . 
v. 48 -RRB- , and in the sphere of thought and feeling our perfection consists in the zeal with which we endeavour to equate our imagination with the total imagination of the humanity of which in God we form a part . 
The logical theory of the opposition between the extension and the comprehension of a concept , the one increasing in the ratio in which the other diminishes , is well known . 
The concept that is most extensive and at the same time least comprehensive is that of being or of thing , which embraces everything that exists and possesses no other distinguishing quality than that of being ; while the concept that is most comprehensive and least extensive is that of the Universe , which is only applicable to itself and comprehends all existing qualities . 
And the logical or rational God , the God obtained by way of negation , the absolute entity , merges , like reality itself , into nothingness ; for , as Hegel pointed out , pure being and pure nothingness are identical . 
And the God of the heart , the God who is felt , the God of living men , is the Universe itself conceived as personality , is the consciousness of the Universe . 
A God universal and personal , altogether different from the individual God of a rigid metaphysical monotheism . 
I must advert here once again to my view of the opposition that exists between individuality and personality , notwithstanding the fact that the one demands the other . 
Individuality is , if I may so express it , the continent or thing which contains , personality the content or thing contained , or I might say that my personality is in a certain sense my comprehension , that which I comprehend or embrace within myself -- which is in a certain way the whole Universe -- and that my individuality is my extension ; the one my infinite , the other my finite . 
A hundred jars of hard earthenware are strongly individualized , but it is possible for them to be all equally empty or all equally full of the same homogeneous liquid , whereas two bladders of so delicate a membrane as to admit of the action of osmosis and exosmosis may be strongly differentiated and contain liquids of a very mixed composition . 
And thus a man , in so far as he is an individual , may be very sharply detached from others , a sort of spiritual crustacean , and yet be very poor in differentiating content . 
And further , it is true on the other hand that the more personality a man has and the greater his interior richness and the more he is a society within himself , the less brusquely he is divided from his fellows . 
In the same way the rigid God of deism , of Aristotelian monotheism , the ens summum , is a being in whom individuality , or rather simplicity , stifles personality . 
Definition kills him , for to define is to impose boundaries , it is to limit , and it is impossible to define the absolutely indefinable . 
This God lacks interior richness ; he is not a society in himself . 
And this the vital revelation obviated by the belief in the Trinity , which makes God a society and even a family in himself and no longer a pure individual . 
The God of faith is personal ; He is a person because He includes three persons , for personality is not sensible of itself in isolation . 
An isolated person ceases to be a person , for whom should he love ? 
And if he does not love , he is not a person . 
Nor can a simple being love himself without his love expanding him into a compound being . 
It was because God was felt as a Father that the belief in the Trinity arose . 
For a God-Father can not be a single , that is , a solitary , God . 
A father is always the father of a family . 
And the fact that God was felt as a father acted as a continual incentive to conceive Him not merely anthropomorphically -- that is to say , as a man , anthropos -- but andromorphically , as a male , anêr . 
In the popular Christian imagination , in effect , God the Father is conceived of as a male . 
And the reason is that man , homo , anthropos , as we know him , is necessarily either a male , vir , anêr , or a female , mulier , gynê . 
And to these may be added the child , who is neuter . 
And hence in order to satisfy imaginatively this necessity of feeling God as a perfect man -- that is , as a family -- arose the cult of the God-Mother , the Virgin Mary , and the cult of the Child Jesus . 
The cult of the Virgin , Mariolatry , which , by the gradual elevation of the divine element in the Virgin has led almost to her deification , answers merely to the demand of the feeling that God should be a perfect man , that God should include in His nature the feminine element . 
The progressive exaltation of the Virgin Mary , the work of Catholic piety , having its beginning in the expression Mother of God , theotokos , deipara , has culminated in attributing to her the status of co-redeemer and in the dogmatic declaration of her conception without the stain of original sin . 
Hence she now occupies a position between Humanity and Divinity and nearer Divinity than Humanity . 
And it has been surmised that in course of time she may perhaps even come to be regarded as yet another personal manifestation of the Godhead . 
And yet this might not necessarily involve the conversion of the Trinity into a Quaternity . 
If pneuma , in Greek , spirit , instead of being neuter had been feminine , who can say that the Virgin Mary might not already have become an incarnation or humanization of the Holy Spirit ? 
That fervent piety which always knows how to mould theological speculation in accordance with its own desires would have found sufficient warranty for such a doctrine in the text of the Gospel , in Luke 's narrative of the Annunciation where the angel Gabriel hails Mary with the words , `` The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee , '' pneuma agion epeleusetai epi se -LRB- Luke i. 35 -RRB- . 
And thus a dogmatic evolution would have been effected parallel to that of the divinization of Jesus , the Son , and his identification with the Word . 
In any case the cult of the Virgin , of the eternal feminine , or rather of the divine feminine , of the divine maternity , helps to complete the personalization of God by constituting Him a family . 
In one of my books -LRB- Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho , part ii. , chap . 
lxvii . -RRB- 
I have said that `` God was and is , in our mind , masculine . 
In His mode of judging and condemning men , He acts as a male , not as a human person above the limitation of sex ; He acts as a father . 
And to counterbalance this , the Mother element was required , the Mother who always forgives , the Mother whose arms are always open to the child when he flies from the frowning brow or uplifted hand of the angry father ; the Mother in whose bosom we seek the dim , comforting memory of that warmth and peace of our pre-natal unconsciousness , of that milky sweetness that soothed our dreams of innocence ; the Mother who knows no justice but that of forgiveness , no law but that of love . 
Our weak and imperfect conception of God as a God with a long beard and a voice of thunder , of a God who promulgates laws and pronounces dooms , of a God who is the Master of a household , a Roman Paterfamilias , required counterpoise and complement , and since fundamentally we are unable to conceive of the personal and living God as exalted above human and even masculine characteristics , and still less as a neutral or hermaphrodite God , we have recourse to providing Him with a feminine God , and by the side of the God-Father we have placed the Goddess-Mother , she who always forgives , because , since she sees with love-blind eyes , she sees always the hidden cause of the fault and in that hidden cause the only justice of forgiveness ... '' And to this I must now add that not only are we unable to conceive of the full and living God as masculine simply , but we are unable to conceive of Him as individual simply , as the projection of a solitary I , an unsocial I , an I that is in reality an abstract I. My living I is an I that is really a We ; my living personal I lives only in other , of other , and by other I 's ; I am sprung , from a multitude of ancestors , I carry them within me in extract , and at the same time I carry within me , potentially , a multitude of descendants , and God , the projection of my I to the infinite -- or rather I , the projection of God to the finite -- must also be multitude . 
Hence , in order to save the personality of God -- that is to say , in order to save the living God -- faith 's need -- the need of the feeling and the imagination -- of conceiving Him and ; feeling Him as possessed of a certain internal multiplicity . 
This need the pagan feeling of a living divinity obviated by polytheism . 
It is the agglomeration of its gods , the republic of them , that really constitutes its Divinity . 
The real God of Hellenic paganism is not so much Father Zeus -LRB- Jupiter -RRB- as the whole society of gods and demi-gods . 
Hence the solemnity of the invocation of Demosthenes when he invoked all the gods and all the goddesses : tois theohis euchomai pasi kahi pasais . 
And when the rationalizers converted the term god , theos , which is properly an adjective , a quality predicated of each one of the gods , into a substantive , and added the definite article to it , they produced the god , o theos , the dead and abstract god of philosophical rationalism , a substantivized quality and therefore void of personality . 
For the masculine concrete god -LRB- el dios -RRB- is nothing but the neuter abstract divine quality -LRB- lo divino -RRB- . 
Now the transition from feeling the divinity in all things to substantivating it and converting the Divinity into God , can not be achieved without feeling undergoing a certain risk . 
And the Aristotelian God , the God of the logical proofs , is nothing more than the Divinity , a concept and not a living person who can be felt and with whom through love man can communicate . 
This God is merely a substantivized adjective ; He is a constitutional God who reigns but does not govern , and Knowledge is His constitutional charter . 
And even in Greco-Latin paganism itself the tendency towards a living monotheism is apparent in the fact that Zeus was conceived of and felt as a father , Zeus patêr , as Homer calls him , the Ju-piter or Ju-pater of the Latins , and as a father of a whole widely extended family of gods and goddesses who together with him constituted the Divinity . 
The conjunction of pagan polytheism with Judaic monotheism , which had endeavoured by other means to save the personality of God , gave birth to the feeling of the Catholic God , a God who is a society , as the pagan God of whom I have spoken was a society , and who at the same time is one , as the God of Israel finally became one . 
Such is the Christian Trinity , whose deepest sense rationalistic deism has scarcely ever succeeded in understanding , that deism , which though more or less impregnated with Christianity , always remains Unitarian or Socinian . 
And the truth is that we feel God less as a superhuman consciousness than as the actual consciousness of the whole human race , past , present , and future , as the collective consciousness of the whole race , and still more , as the total and infinite consciousness which embraces and sustains all consciousnesses , infra-human , human , and perhaps , super-human . 
The divinity that there is in everything , from the lowest -- that is to say , from the least conscious -- of living forms , to the highest , including our own human consciousness , this divinity we feel to be personalized , conscious of itself , in God . 
And this gradation of consciousnesses , this sense of the gulf between the human and the fully divine , the universal , consciousness , finds its counterpart in the belief in angels with their different hierarchies , as intermediaries between our human consciousness and that of God . 
And these gradations a faith consistent with itself must believe to be infinite , for only by an infinite number of degrees is it possible to pass from the finite to the infinite . 
Deistic rationalism conceives God as the Reason of the Universe , but its logic compels it to conceive Him as an impersonal reason -- that is to say , as an idea -- while deistic vitalism feels and imagines God as Consciousness , and therefore as a person or rather as a society of persons . 
The consciousness of each one of us , in effect , is a society of persons ; in me there are various I 's and even the I 's of those among whom I live , live in me . 
The God of deistic rationalism , in effect , the God of the logical proofs of His existence , the ens realissimum and the immobile prime mover , is nothing more than a Supreme Reason , but in the same sense in which we can call the law of universal gravitation the reason of the falling of bodies , this law being merely the explanation of the phenomenon . 
But will anyone say that that which we call the law of universal gravitation , or any other law or mathematical principle , is a true and independent reality , that it is an angel , that it is something which possesses consciousness of itself and others , that it is a person ? 
No , it is nothing but an idea without any reality outside of the mind of him who conceives it . 
And similarly this God-Reason either possesses consciousness of himself or he possesses no reality outside the mind that conceives him . 
And if he possesses consciousness of himself , he becomes a personal reason , and then all the value of the traditional proofs disappears , for these proofs only proved a reason , but not a supreme consciousness . 
Mathematics prove an order , a constancy , a reason in the series of mechanical phenomena , but they ` do not prove that this reason is conscious of itself . 
This reason is a logical necessity , but the logical necessity does not prove the teleological or finalist necessity . 
And where there is no finality there is no personality , there is no consciousness . 
The rational God , therefore -- that is to say , the God who is simply the Reason of the Universe and nothing more -- consummates his own destruction , is destroyed in our mind in so far as he is such a God , and is only born again in us when we feel him in our heart as a living person , as Consciousness , and no longer merely as the impersonal and objective Reason of the Universe . 
If we wish for a rational explanation of the construction of a machine , all that we require to know is the mechanical science of its constructor ; but if we would have a reason for the existence of such a machine , then , since it is the work not of Nature but of man , we must suppose a conscious , constructive being . 
But the second part of this reasoning is not applicable to God , even though it be said that in Him the mechanical science and the mechanician , by means of which the machine was constructed , are one and the same thing . 
From the rational point of view this identification is merely a begging of the question . 
And thus it is that reason destroys this Supreme Reason , in so far as the latter is a person . 
The human reason , in effect , is a reason that is based upon the irrational , upon the total vital consciousness , upon will and feeling ; our human reason is not a reason that can prove to us the existence of a Supreme Reason , which in its turn would have to be based upon the Supreme Irrational , upon the Universal Consciousness . 
And the revelation of this Supreme Consciousness in our feeling and imagination , by love , by faith , by the process of personalization , is that which leads us to believe in the living God . 
And this God , the living God , your God , our God , is in me , is in you , lives in us , and we live and move and have our being in Him . 
And He is in us by virtue of the hunger , the longing , which we have for Him , He is Himself creating the longing for Himself . 
And He is the God of the humble , for in the words of the Apostle , God chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise , and the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty -LRB- i Cor . 
i. 27 -RRB- . 
And God is in each one of us in the measure in which each one feels Him and loves Him . 
`` If of two men , '' says Kierkegaard , `` one prays to the true God without sincerity of heart , and the other prays to an idol with all the passion of an infinite yearning , it is the first who really prays to an idol , while the second really prays to God . '' 
It would be better to say that the true God is He to whom man truly prays and whom man truly desires . 
And there may even be a truer revelation in superstition itself than in theology . 
The venerable Father of the long beard and white locks who appears among the clouds carrying the globe of the world in his hand is more living and more real than the ens realissimum of theodicy . 
Reason is an analytical , that is , a dissolving force , whenever it transfers its activity from the form of intuitions , whether those of the individual instinct of preservation or those of the social instinct of perpetuation , and applies it to the essence and matter of them . 
Reason orders the sensible perceptions which give us the material world ; but when its analysis is exercised upon the reality of the perceptions themselves , it dissolves them and plunges us into a world of appearances , a world of shadows without consistency , for outside the domain of the formal , reason is nihilist and annihilating . 
And it performs the same terrible office when we withdraw it from its proper domain and apply it to the scrutiny of the imaginative intuitions which give us the spiritual world . 
For reason annihilates and imagination completes , integrates or totalizes ; reason by itself alone kills , and it is imagination that gives life . 
If it is true that imagination by itself alone , in giving us life without limit , leads us to lose our identity in the All and also kills us as individuals , it kills us by excess of life . 
Reason , the head , speaks to us the word Nothing ! 
imagination , the heart , the word All ! 
and between all and nothing , by the fusion of the all and the nothing within us , we live in God , who is All , and God lives in us who , without Him , are nothing . 
Reason reiterates , Vanity of vanities ! 
all is vanity ! 
And imagination answers , Plenitude of plenitudes ! 
all is plenitude ! 
And thus we live the vanity of plenitude or the plenitude of vanity . 
And so deeply rooted in the depths of man 's being is this vital need of living a world -LSB- 42 -RSB- illogical , irrational , personal or divine , that those who do not believe in God , or believe that they do not believe in Him , believe nevertheless in some little pocket god or even devil of their own , or in an omen , or in a horseshoe picked up by chance on the roadside and carried about with them to bring them good luck and defend them from that very reason whose loyal and devoted henchmen they imagine themselves to be . 
The God whom we hunger after is the God to whom we pray , the God of the Pater Noster , of the Lord 's Prayer ; the God whom we beseech , before all and above all , and whether we are aware of it or not , to instil faith into us , to make us believe in Him , to make Himself in us , the God to whom we pray that His name may be hallowed and that His will may be done -- His will , not His reason -- on earth as it is in heaven ; but feeling that His will can not be other than the essence of our will , the desire to persist eternally . 
And such a God is the God of love -- how He is it profits us not to ask , but rather let each consult his own heart and give his imagination leave to picture Him in the remoteness of the Universe , gazing down upon him with those myriad eyes of His that shine in the night-darkened heavens . 
He in whom you believe , reader , He is your God , He who has lived with you and within you , who was born with you , who was a child when you were a child , who became a man according as you became a man , who will vanish when you yourself vanish , and who is your principle of continuity in the spiritual life , for He is the principle of solidarity among all men and in each man and between men and the Universe , and He is , as you are , a person . 
And if you believe in God , God believes in you , and believing in you He creates you continually . 
For in your essence you are nothing but the idea that God possesses of you -- but a living idea , because the idea of a God who is living and conscious of Himself , of a God-Consciousness , and apart from what you are in the society of God you are nothing . 
How to define God ? 
Yes , that is our longing . 
That was the longing of the man Jacob , when , after wrestling all the night until the breaking of the day with that divine visitant , he cried , `` Tell me , I pray thee , thy name ! '' 
-LRB- Gen. xxxii . 
29 -RRB- . 
Listen to the words of that great Christian preacher , Frederick William Robertson , in a sermon preached in Trinity Chapel , Brighton , on the 10th of June , 1849 : `` And this is our struggle -- the struggle . 
Let any true man go down into the deeps of his own being , and answer us -- what is the cry that comes from the most real part of his nature ? 
Is it the cry for daily bread ? 
Jacob asked for that in his first communing with God -- preservation , safety . 
Is it even this -- to be forgiven our sins ? 
Jacob had a sin to be forgiven , and in that most solemn moment of his existence he did not say a syllable about it . 
Or is it this -- ` Hallowed be Thy name ' ? 
No , my brethren . 
Out of our frail and yet sublime humanity , the demand that rises in the earthlier hours of our religion may be this -- ` Save my soul ' ; but in the most unearthly moments it is this -- ` Tell me thy name . ' 
We move through a world of mystery ; and the deepest question is , What is the being that is ever near , sometimes felt , never seen ; that which has haunted us from childhood with a dream of something surpassingly fair , which has never yet been realized ; that which sweeps through the soul at times as a desolation , like the blast from the wings of the Angel of Death , leaving us stricken and silent in our loneliness ; that which has touched us in our tenderest point , and the flesh has quivered with agony , and our mortal affections have shrivelled up with pain ; that which comes to us in aspirations of nobleness and conceptions of superhuman excellence ? 
Shall we say It or He ? 
What is It ? 
Who is He ? 
Those anticipations of Immortality and God -- what are they ? 
Are they the mere throbbings of my own heart , heard and mistaken for a living something beside me ? 
Are they the sound of my own wishes , echoing through the vast void of Nothingness ? 
or shall I call them God , Father , Spirit , Love ? 
A living Being within me or outside me ? 
Tell me Thy name , thou awful mystery of Loveliness ! 
This is the struggle of all earnest life . '' 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- Thus Robertson . 
To which I must add this comment , that Tell me thy name is essentially the same as Save my soul ! 
We ask Him His name in order that He may save our soul , that He may save the human soul , that He may save the human finality of the Universe . 
And if they tell us that He is called He , that He is the ens realissimum or the Supreme Being or any other metaphysical name , we are not contented , for we know that every metaphysical name is an X , and we go on asking Him His name . 
And there is only one name that satisfies our longing , and that is the name Saviour , Jesus . 
God is the love that saves . 
As Browning said in his Christmas Eve and Easter Day , For the loving worm within its clod , Were diviner than a loveless God Amid his worlds , I will dare to say . 
The essence of the divine is Love , Will that personalizes and eternalizes , that feels the hunger for eternity and infinity . 
It is ourselves , it is our eternity that we seek in God , it is our divinization . 
It was Browning again who said , in Saul , 'T is the weakness in strength that I cry for ! 
my flesh that I seek In the Godhead ! 
But this God who saves us , this personal God , the Consciousness of the Universe who envelops and sustains our consciousnesses , this God who gives human finality to the whole creation -- does He exist ? 
Have we proofs of His existence ? 
This question leads in the first place to an enquiry into the cleaning of this notion of existence . 
What is it to exist and in what sense do we speak of things as not existing ? 
In its etymological signification to exist is to be outside of ourselves , outside of our mind : ex-sistere . 
But is there anything outside of our mind , outside of our consciousness which embraces the sum of the known ? 
Undoubtedly there is . 
The matter of knowledge comes to us from without . 
And what is the mode of this matter ? 
It is impossible for us to know , for to know is to clothe matter with form , and hence we can not know the formless as formless . 
To do so would be tantamount to investing chaos with order . 
This problem of the existence of God , a problem that is rationally insoluble , is really identical with the problem of consciousness , of the ex-sistentia and not of the in-sistentia of consciousness , it is none other than the problem of the substantial existence of the soul , the problem of the perpetuity of the human soul , the problem of the human finality of the Universe itself . 
To believe in a living and personal God , in an eternal and universal consciousness that knows and loves us , is to believe that the Universe exists for man . 
For man , or for a consciousness of the same order as the human consciousness , of the same nature , although sublimated , a consciousness that is capable of knowing us , in the depth of whose being our memory may live for ever . 
Perhaps , as I have said before , by a supreme and desperate effort of resignation we might succeed in making the sacrifice of our personality provided that we knew that at our death it would go to enrich a Supreme Personality ; provided that we knew that the Universal Soul was nourished by our souls and had need of them . 
We might perhaps meet death with a desperate resignation or with a resigned despair , delivering up our soul to the soul of humanity , bequeathing to it our work , the work that bears the impress of our person , if it were certain that this humanity were destined to bequeath its soul in its turn to another soul , when at long last consciousness shall have become extinct upon this desire-tormented Earth . 
But is it certain ? 
And if the soul of humanity is eternal , if the human collective consciousness is eternal , if there is a Consciousness of the Universe , and if this Consciousness is eternal , why must our own individual consciousness -- yours , reader , mine -- be not eternal ? 
In the vast all of the Universe , must there be this unique anomaly -- a consciousness that knows itself , loves itself and feels itself , joined to an organism which can only live within such and such degrees of heat , a merely transitory phenomenon ? 
No , it is not mere curiosity that inspires the wish to know whether or not the stars are inhabited by living organisms , by consciousnesses akin to our own , and a profound longing enters into that dream that our souls shall pass from star to star through the vast spaces of the heavens , in an infinite series of transmigrations . 
The feeling of the divine makes us wish and believe that everything is animated , that consciousness , in a greater or less degree , extends through everything . 
We wish not only to save ourselves , but to save the world from nothingness . 
And therefore God . 
Such is His finality as we feel it . 
What would a universe be without any consciousness capable of reflecting it and knowing it ? 
What would objectified reason be without will and feeling ? 
For us it would be equivalent to nothing -- a thousand times more dreadful than nothing . 
If such a supposition is reality , our life is deprived of sense and value . 
It is not , therefore , rational necessity , but vital anguish that impels us to believe in God . 
And to believe in God -- I must reiterate it yet again -- is , before all and above all , to feel a hunger for God , a hunger for divinity , to be sensible of His lack and absence , to wish that God may exist . 
And it is to wish to save the human finality of the Universe . 
For one might even come to resign oneself to being absorbed by God , if it be that our consciousness is based upon a Consciousness , if consciousness is the end of the Universe . 
`` The wicked man hath said in his heart , There is no God . '' 
And this is truth . 
For in his head the righteous man may say to himself , God does not exist ! 
But only the wicked can say it in his heart . 
Not to believe that there is a God or to believe that there is not a God , is one thing ; to resign oneself to there not being a God is another thing , and it is a terrible and inhuman thing ; but not to wish that there be a God exceeds every other moral monstrosity ; although , as a matter of fact , those who deny God deny Him because of their despair at not finding Him . 
And now reason once again confronts us with the Sphinx-like question -- the Sphinx , in effect , is reason -- Does God exist ? 
This eternal and eternalizing person who gives meaning -- and I will add , a human meaning , for there is none other -- to the Universe , is it a substantial something , existing independently of our consciousness , independently of our desire ? 
Here we arrive at the insoluble , and it is best that it should be so . 
Let it suffice for reason that it can not prove the impossibility of His existence . 
To believe in God is to long for His existence and , further , it is to act as if He existed ; it is to live by this longing and to make it the inner spring of our action . 
This longing or hunger for divinity begets hope , hope begets faith , and faith and hope beget charity . 
Of this divine longing is born our sense of beauty , of finality , of goodness . 
Let us see how this may be . 
Sanctius ac reverentius visum de actis deorum credere quam scire . 
-- TACITUS : Germania , 34 . 
The road that leads us to the living God , the God of the heart , and that leads us back to Him when we have left Him for the lifeless God of logic , is the road of faith , not of rational or mathematical conviction . 
And what is faith ? 
This is the question propounded in the Catechism of Christian Doctrine that was taught us at school , and the answer runs : Faith is believing what we have not seen . 
This , in an essay written some twelve years ago , I amended as follows : `` Believing what we have not seen , no ! 
but creating what we do not see . '' 
And I have already told you that believing in God is , in the first instance at least , wishing that God may be , longing for the existence of God . 
The theological virtue of faith , according to the Apostle Paul , whose definition serves as the basis of the traditional Christian disquisitions upon it , is `` the substance of things hoped for , the evidence of things not seen , '' elpizomevôn hupostasis , pragmatôn elegchos ou blepomenôn -LRB- Heb . 
xi . 
1 -RRB- . 
The substance , or rather the support and basis , of hope , the guarantee of it . 
That which connects , or , rather than connects , subordinates , faith to hope . 
And in fact we do not hope because we believe , but rather we believe because we hope . 
It is hope in God , it is the ardent longing that there may be a God who guarantees the eternity of consciousness , that leads us to believe in Him . 
But faith , which after all is something compound , comprising a cognitive , logical , or rational element together with an affective , biotic , sentimental , and strictly irrational element , is presented to us under the form of knowledge . 
And hence the insuperable difficulty of separating it from some dogma or other . 
Pure faith , free from dogmas , about which I wrote a great deal years ago , is a phantasm . 
Neither is the difficulty overcome by inventing the theory of faith in faith itself . 
Faith needs a matter to work upon . 
Believing is a form of knowing , even if it be no more than a knowing and even a formulating of our vital longing . 
In ordinary language the term `` believing , '' however , is used in a double and even a contradictory sense . 
It may express , on the one hand , the highest degree of the mind 's conviction of the truth of a thing , and , on the other hand , it may imply merely a weak and hesitating persuasion of its truth . 
For if in one sense believing expresses the firmest kind of assent we are capable of giving , the expression `` I believe that it is so , although I am not sure of it , '' is nevertheless common in ordinary speech . 
And this agrees with what we have said above with respect to uncertainty as the basis of faith . 
The most robust faith , in so far as it is distinguished from all other knowledge that is not pistic or of faith -- faithful , as we might say -- is based on uncertainty . 
And this is because faith , the guarantee of things hoped for , is not so much rational adhesion to a theoretical principle as trust in a person who assures us of something . 
Faith supposes an objective , personal element . 
