Homo sum ; nihil humani a me alienum puto , said the Latin playwright . 
And I would rather say , Nullum hominem a me alienum puto : I am a man ; no other man do I deem a stranger . 
For to me the adjective humanus is no less suspect than its abstract substantive humanitas , humanity . 
Neither `` the human '' nor `` humanity , '' neither the simple adjective nor the substantivized adjective , but the concrete substantive -- man . 
The man of flesh and bone ; the man who is born , suffers , and dies -- above all , who dies ; the man who eats and drinks and plays and sleeps and thinks and wills ; the man who is seen and heard ; the brother , the real brother . 
For there is another thing which is also called man , and he is the subject of not a few lucubrations , more or less scientific . 
He is the legendary featherless biped , the zôon politikhon of Aristotle , the social contractor of Rousseau , the homo economicus of the Manchester school , the homo sapiens of Linnæus , or , if you like , the vertical mammal . 
A man neither of here nor there , neither of this age nor of another , who has neither sex nor country , who is , in brief , merely an idea . 
That is to say , a no-man . 
The man we have to do with is the man of flesh and bone -- I , you , reader of mine , the other man yonder , all of us who walk solidly on the earth . 
And this concrete man , this man of flesh and bone , is at once the subject and the supreme object of all philosophy , whether certain self-styled philosophers like it or not . 
In most of the histories of philosophy that I know , philosophic systems are presented to us as if growing out of one another spontaneously , and their authors , the philosophers , appear only as mere pretexts . 
The inner biography of the philosophers , of the men who philosophized , occupies a secondary place . 
And yet it is precisely this inner biography that explains for us most things . 
It behoves us to say , before all , that philosophy lies closer to poetry than to science . 
All philosophic systems which have been constructed as a supreme concord of the final results of the individual sciences have in every age possessed much less consistency and life than those which expressed the integral spiritual yearning of their authors . 
And , though they concern us so greatly , and are , indeed , indispensable for our life and thought , the sciences are in a certain sense more foreign to us than philosophy . 
They fulfil a more objective end -- that is to say , an end more external to ourselves . 
They are fundamentally a matter of economics . 
A new scientific discovery , of the kind called theoretical , is , like a mechanical discovery -- that of the steam-engine , the telephone , the phonograph , or the aeroplane -- a thing which is useful for something else . 
Thus the telephone may be useful to us in enabling us to communicate at a distance with the woman we love . 
But she , wherefore is she useful to us ? 
A man takes an electric tram to go to hear an opera , and asks himself , Which , in this case , is the more useful , the tram or the opera ? 
Philosophy answers to our need of forming a complete and unitary conception of the world and of life , and as a result of this conception , a feeling which gives birth to an inward attitude and even to outward action . 
But the fact is that this feeling , instead of being a consequence of this conception , is the cause of it . 
Our philosophy -- that is , our mode of understanding or not understanding the world and life -- springs from our feeling towards life itself . 
And life , like everything affective , has roots in subconsciousness , perhaps in unconsciousness . 
It is not usually our ideas that make us optimists or pessimists , but it is our optimism or our pessimism , of physiological or perhaps pathological origin , as much the one as the other , that makes our ideas . 
Man is said to be a reasoning animal . 
I do not know why he has not been defined as an affective or feeling animal . 
Perhaps that which differentiates him from other animals is feeling rather than reason . 
More often I have seen a cat reason than laugh or weep . 
Perhaps it weeps or laughs inwardly -- but then perhaps , also inwardly , the crab resolves equations of the second degree . 
And thus , in a philosopher , what must needs most concern us is the man . 
Take Kant , the man Immanuel Kant , who was born and lived at Königsberg , in the latter part of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth . 
In the philosophy of this man Kant , a man of heart and head -- that is to say , a man -- there is a significant somersault , as Kierkegaard , another man -- and what a man ! 
-- would have said , the somersault from the Critique of Pure Reason to the Critique of Practical Reason . 
He reconstructs in the latter what he destroyed in the former , in spite of what those may say who do not see the man himself . 
After having examined and pulverized with his analysis the traditional proofs of the existence of God , of the Aristotelian God , who is the God corresponding to the zôon politikon , the abstract God , the unmoved prime Mover , he reconstructs God anew ; but the God of the conscience , the Author of the moral order -- the Lutheran God , in short . 
This transition of Kant exists already in embryo in the Lutheran notion of faith . 
The first God , the rational God , is the projection to the outward infinite of man as he is by definition -- that is to say , of the abstract man , of the man no-man ; the other God , the God of feeling and volition , is the projection to the inward infinite of man as he is by life , of the concrete man , the man of flesh and bone . 
Kant reconstructed with the heart that which with the head he had overthrown . 
And we know , from the testimony of those who knew him and from his testimony in his letters and private declarations , that the man Kant , the more or less selfish old bachelor who professed philosophy at Königsberg at the end of the century of the Encyclopedia and the goddess of Reason , was a man much preoccupied with the problem -- I mean with the only real vital problem , the problem that strikes at the very root of our being , the problem of our individual and personal destiny , of the immortality of the soul . 
The man Kant was not resigned to die utterly . 
And because he was not resigned to die utterly he made that leap , that immortal somersault , -LSB- 5 -RSB- from the one Critique to the other . 
Whosoever reads the Critique of Practical Reason carefully and without blinkers will see that , in strict fact , the existence of God is therein deduced from the immortality of the soul , and not the immortality of the soul from the existence of God . 
The categorical imperative leads us to a moral postulate which necessitates in its turn , in the teleological or rather eschatological order , the immortality of the soul , and in order to sustain this immortality God is introduced . 
All the rest is the jugglery of the professional of philosophy . 
The man Kant felt that morality was the basis of eschatology , but the professor of philosophy inverted the terms . 
Another professor , the professor and man William James , has somewhere said that for the generality of men God is the provider of immortality . 
Yes , for the generality of men , including the man Kant , the man James , and the man who writes these lines which you , reader , are reading . 
Talking to a peasant one day , I proposed to him the hypothesis that there might indeed be a God who governs heaven and earth , a Consciousness -LSB- 6 -RSB- of the Universe , but that for all that the soul of every man may not be immortal in the traditional and concrete sense . 
He replied : `` Then wherefore God ? '' 
So answered , in the secret tribunal of their consciousness , the man Kant and the man James . 
Only in their capacity as professors they were compelled to justify rationally an attitude in itself so little rational . 
Which does not mean , of course , that the attitude is absurd . 
Hegel made famous his aphorism that all the rational is real and all the real rational ; but there are many of us who , unconvinced by Hegel , continue to believe that the real , the really real , is irrational , that reason builds upon irrationalities . 
Hegel , a great framer of definitions , attempted with definitions to reconstruct the universe , like that artillery sergeant who said that cannon were made by taking a hole and enclosing it with steel . 
Another man , the man Joseph Butler , the Anglican bishop who lived at the beginning of the eighteenth century and whom Cardinal Newman declared to be the greatest man in the Anglican Church , wrote , at the conclusion of the first chapter of his great work , The Analogy of Religion , the chapter which treats of a future life , these pregnant words : `` This credibility of a future life , which has been here insisted upon , how little soever it may satisfy our curiosity , seems to answer all the purposes of religion , in like manner as a demonstrative proof would . 
Indeed a proof , even a demonstrative one , of a future life , would not be a proof of religion . 
For , that we are to live hereafter , is just as reconcilable with the scheme of atheism , and as well to be accounted for by it , as that we are now alive is : and therefore nothing can be more absurd than to argue from that scheme that there can be no future state . '' 
The man Butler , whose works were perhaps known to the man Kant , wished to save the belief in the immortality of the soul , and with this object he made it independent of belief in God . 
The first chapter of his Analogy treats , as I have said , of the future life , and the second of the government of God by rewards and punishments . 
And the fact is that , fundamentally , the good Anglican bishop deduces the existence of God from the immortality of the soul . 
And as this deduction was the good Anglican bishop 's starting-point , he had not to make that somersault which at the close of the same century the good Lutheran philosopher had to make . 
Butler , the bishop , was one man and Kant , the professor , another man . 
To be a man is to be something concrete , unitary , and substantive ; it is to be a thing -- res . 
Now we know what another man , the man Benedict Spinoza , that Portuguese Jew who was born and lived in Holland in the middle of the seventeenth century , wrote about the nature of things . 
The sixth proposition of Part III . 
of his Ethic states : unaquoeque res , quatenus in se est , in suo esse perseverare conatur -- that is , Everything , in so far as it is in itself , endeavours to persist in its own being . 
Everything in so far as it is in itself -- that is to say , in so far as it is substance , for according to him substance is id quod in se est et per se concipitur -- that which is in itself and is conceived by itself . 
And in the following proposition , the seventh , of the same part , he adds : conatus , quo unaquoeque res in suo esse perseverare conatur , nihil est proeter ipsius rei actualem essentiam -- that is , the endeavour wherewith everything endeavours to persist in its own being is nothing but the actual essence of the thing itself . 
This means that your essence , reader , mine , that of the man Spinoza , that of the man Butler , of the man Kant , and of every man who is a man , is nothing but the endeavour , the effort , which he makes to continue to be a man , not to die . 
And the other proposition which follows these two , the eighth , says : conatus , quo unaquoeque res in suo esse perseverare conatur , nullum tempus finitum , sed indefinitum involvit -- that is , The endeavour whereby each individual thing endeavours to persist involves no finite time but indefinite time . 
That is to say that you , I , and Spinoza wish never to die and that this longing of ours never to die is our actual essence . 
Nevertheless , this poor Portuguese Jew , exiled in the mists of Holland , could never attain to believing in his own personal immortality , and all his philosophy was but a consolation which he contrived for his lack of faith . 
Just as other men have a pain in hand or foot , heart-ache or head-ache , so he had God-ache . 
Unhappy man ! 
And unhappy fellow-men ! 
And man , this thing , is he a thing ? 
How absurd soever the question may appear , there are some who have propounded it . 
Not long ago there went abroad a certain doctrine called Positivism , which did much good and much ill . 
And among other ills that it wrought was the introduction of a method of analysis whereby facts were pulverized , reduced to a dust of facts . 
Most of the facts labelled as such by Positivism were really only fragments of facts . 
In psychology its action was harmful . 
There were even scholastics meddling in literature -- I will not say philosophers meddling in poetry , because poet and philosopher are twin brothers , if not even one and the same -- who carried this Positivist psychological analysis into the novel and the drama , where the main business is to give act and motion to concrete men , men of flesh and bone , and by dint of studying states of consciousness , consciousness itself disappeared . 
The same thing happened to them which is said often to happen in the examination and testing of certain complicated , organic , living chemical compounds , when the reagents destroy the very body which it was proposed to examine and all that is obtained is the products of its decomposition . 
Taking as their starting-point the evident fact that contradictory states pass through our consciousness , they did not succeed in envisaging consciousness itself , the `` I. '' To ask a man about his `` I '' is like asking him about his body . 
And note that in speaking of the `` I , '' I speak of the concrete and personal `` I , '' not of the `` I '' of Fichte , but of Fichte himself , the man Fichte . 
That which determines a man , that which makes him one man , one and not another , the man he is and not the man he is not , is a principle of unity and a principle of continuity . 
A principle of unity firstly in space , thanks to the body , and next in action and intention . 
When we walk , one foot does not go forward and the other backward , nor , when we look , if we are normal , does one eye look towards the north and the other towards the south . 
In each moment of our life we entertain some purpose , and to this purpose the synergy of our actions is directed . 
Notwithstanding the next moment we may change our purpose . 
And in a certain sense a man is so much the more a man the more unitary his action . 
Some there are who throughout their whole life follow but one single purpose , be it what it may . 
Also a principle of continuity in time . 
Without entering upon a discussion -- an unprofitable discussion -- as to whether I am or am not he who I was twenty years ago , it appears to me to be indisputable that he who I am to-day derives , by a continuous series of states of consciousness , from him who was in my body twenty years ago . 
Memory is the basis of individual personality , just as tradition is the basis of the collective personality of a people . 
We live in memory and by memory , and our spiritual life is at bottom simply the effort of our memory to persist , to transform itself into hope , the effort of our past to transform itself into our future . 
All this , I know well , is sheer platitude ; but in going about in the world one meets men who seem to have no feeling of their own personality . 
One of my best friends with whom I have walked and talked every day for many years , whenever I spoke to him of this sense of one 's own personality , used to say : `` But I have no sense of myself ; I do n't know what that is . '' 
On a certain occasion this friend remarked to me : `` I should like to be So-and-so '' -LRB- naming someone -RRB- , and I said : `` That is what I shall never be able to understand -- that one should want to be someone else . 
-LRB- To want to be someone else is to want to cease to be he who one is . -RRB- 
I understand that one should wish to have what someone else has , his wealth or his knowledge ; but to be someone else , that is a thing I can not comprehend . '' 
It has often been said that every man who has suffered misfortunes prefers to be himself , even with his misfortunes , rather than to be someone else without them . 
For unfortunate men , when they preserve their normality in their misfortune -- that is to say , when they endeavour to persist in their own being -- prefer misfortune to non-existence . 
For myself I can say that as a youth , and even as a child , I remained unmoved when shown the most moving pictures of hell , for even then nothing appeared to me quite so horrible as nothingness itself . 
It was a furious hunger of being that possessed me , an appetite for divinity , as one of our ascetics has put it . 
-LSB- 7 -RSB- To propose to a man that he should be someone else , that he should become someone else , is to propose to him that he should cease to be himself . 
Everyone defends his own personality , and only consents to a change in his mode of thinking or of feeling in so far as this change is able to enter into the unity of his spirit and become involved in its continuity ; in so far as this change can harmonize and integrate itself with all the rest of his mode of being , thinking and feeling , and can at the same time knit itself with his memories . 
Neither of a man nor of a people -- which is , in a certain sense , also a man -- can a change be demanded which breaks the unity and continuity of the person . 
A man can change greatly , almost completely even , but the change must take place within his continuity . 
It is true that in certain individuals there occur what are called changes of personality ; but these are pathological cases , and as such are studied by alienists . 
In these changes of personality , memory , the basis of consciousness , is completely destroyed , and all that is left to the sufferer as the substratum of his individual continuity , which has now ceased to be personal , is the physical organism . 
For the subject who suffers it , such an infirmity is equivalent to death -- it is not equivalent to death only for those who expect to inherit his fortune , if he possesses one ! 
And this infirmity is nothing less than a revolution , a veritable revolution . 
A disease is , in a certain sense , an organic dissociation ; it is a rebellion of some element or organ of the living body which breaks the vital synergy and seeks an end distinct from that which the other elements co-ordinated with it seek . 
Its end , considered in itself -- that is to say , in the abstract -- may be more elevated , more noble , more anything you like ; but it is different . 
To fly and breathe in the air may be better than to swim and breathe in the water ; but if the fins of a fish aimed at converting themselves into wings , the fish , as a fish , would perish . 
And it is useless to say that it would end by becoming a bird , if in this becoming there was not a process of continuity . 
I do not precisely know , but perhaps it may be possible for a fish to engender a bird , or another fish more akin to a bird than itself ; but a fish , this fish , can not itself and during its own lifetime become a bird . 
Everything in me that conspires to break the unity and continuity of my life conspires to destroy me and consequently to destroy itself . 
Every individual in a people who conspires to break the spiritual unity and continuity of that people tends to destroy it and to destroy himself as a part of that people . 
What if some other people is better than our own ? 
Very possibly , although perhaps we do not clearly understand what is meant by better or worse . 
Richer ? 
Granted . 
More cultured ? 
Granted likewise . 
Happier ? 
Well , happiness ... but still , let it pass ! 
A conquering people -LRB- or what is called conquering -RRB- while we are conquered ? 
Well and good . 
All this is good -- but it is something different . 
And that is enough . 
Because for me the becoming other than I am , the breaking of the unity and continuity of my life , is to cease to be he who I am -- that is to say , it is simply to cease to be . 
And that -- no ! 
Anything rather than that ! 
Another , you say , might play the part that I play as well or better ? 
Another might fulfil my function in society ? 
Yes , but it would not be I. `` I , I , I , always I ! '' 
some reader will exclaim ; `` and who are you ? '' 
I might reply in the words of Obermann , that tremendous man Obermann : `` For the universe , nothing -- for myself , everything '' ; but no , I would rather remind him of a doctrine of the man Kant -- to wit , that we ought to think of our fellow-men not as means but as ends . 
For the question does not touch me alone , it touches you also , grumbling reader , it touches each and all . 
Singular judgments have the value of universal judgments , the logicians say . 
The singular is not particular , it is universal . 
Man is an end , not a means . 
All civilization addresses itself to man , to each man , to each I . 
What is that idol , call it Humanity or call it what you like , to which all men and each individual man must be sacrificed ? 
For I sacrifice myself for my neighbours , for my fellow-countrymen , for my children , and these sacrifice themselves in their turn for theirs , and theirs again for those that come after them , and so on in a never-ending series of generations . 
And who receives the fruit of this sacrifice ? 
Those who talk to us about this fantastic sacrifice , this dedication without an object , are wont to talk to us also about the right to live . 
What is this right to live ? 
They tell me I am here to realize I know not what social end ; but I feel that I , like each one of my fellows , am here to realize myself , to live . 
Yes , yes , I see it all ! 
-- an enormous social activity , a mighty civilization , a profuseness of science , of art , of industry , of morality , and afterwards , when we have filled the world with industrial marvels , with great factories , with roads , museums , and libraries , we shall fall exhausted at the foot of it all , and it will subsist -- for whom ? 
Was man made for science or was science made for man ? 
`` Why ! '' 
the reader will exclaim again , `` we are coming back to what the Catechism says : ' Q . 
For whom did God create the world ? 
A . 
For man . ' '' 
Well , why not ? 
-- so ought the man who is a man to reply . 
The ant , if it took account of these matters and were a person , would reply `` For the ant , '' and it would reply rightly . 
The world is made for consciousness , for each consciousness . 
A human soul is worth all the universe , someone -- I know not whom -- has said and said magnificently . 
A human soul , mind you ! 
Not a human life . 
Not this life . 
And it happens that the less a man believes in the soul -- that is to say in his conscious immortality , personal and concrete -- the more he will exaggerate the worth of this poor transitory life . 
This is the source from which springs all that effeminate , sentimental ebullition against war . 
True , a man ought not to wish to die , but the death to be renounced is the death of the soul . 
`` Whosoever will save his life shall lose it , '' says the Gospel ; but it does not say `` whosoever will save his soul , '' the immortal soul -- or , at any rate , which we believe and wish to be immortal . 
And what all the objectivists do not see , or rather do not wish to see , is that when a man affirms his `` I , '' his personal consciousness , he affirms man , man concrete and real , affirms the true humanism -- the humanism of man , not of the things of man -- and in affirming man he affirms consciousness . 
For the only consciousness of which we have consciousness is that of man . 
The world is for consciousness . 
Or rather this for , this notion of finality , and feeling rather than notion , this teleological feeling , is born only where there is consciousness . 
Consciousness and finality are fundamentally the same thing . 
If the sun possessed consciousness it would think , no doubt , that it lived in order to give light to the worlds ; but it would also and above all think that the worlds existed in order that it might give them light and enjoy itself in giving them light and so live . 
And it would think well . 
And all this tragic fight of man to save himself , this immortal craving for immortality which caused the man Kant to make that immortal leap of which I have spoken , all this is simply a fight for consciousness . 
If consciousness is , as some inhuman thinker has said , nothing more than a flash of light between two eternities of darkness , then there is nothing more execrable than existence . 
Some may espy a fundamental contradiction in everything that I am saying , now expressing a longing for unending life , now affirming that this earthly life does not possess the value that is given to it . 
Contradiction ? 
To be sure ! 
The contradiction of my heart that says Yes and of my head that says No ! 
Of course there is contradiction . 
Who does not recollect those words of the Gospel , `` Lord , I believe , help thou my unbelief '' ? 
Contradiction ! 
Of course ! 
Since we only live in and by contradictions , since life is tragedy and the tragedy is perpetual struggle , without victory or the hope of victory , life is contradiction . 
The values we are discussing are , as you see , values of the heart , and against values of the heart reasons do not avail . 
For reasons are only reasons -- that is to say , they are not even truths . 
There is a class of pedantic label-mongers , pedants by nature and by grace , who remind me of that man who , purposing to console a father whose son has suddenly died in the flower of his years , says to him , `` Patience , my friend , we all must die ! '' 
Would you think it strange if this father were offended at such an impertinence ? 
For it is an impertinence . 
There are times when even an axiom can become an impertinence . 
How many times may it not be said -- Para pensar cual tú , sólo es preciso no tener nada mas que inteligencia . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- There are , in fact , people who appear to think only with the brain , or with whatever may be the specific thinking organ ; while others think with all the body and all the soul , with the blood , with the marrow of the bones , with the heart , with the lungs , with the belly , with the life . 
And the people who think only with the brain develop into definition-mongers ; they become the professionals of thought . 
And you know what a professional is ? 
You know what a product of the differentiation of labour is ? 
Take a professional boxer . 
He has learnt to hit with such economy of effort that , while concentrating all his strength in the blow , he only brings into play just those muscles that are required for the immediate and definite object of his action -- to knock out his opponent . 
A blow given by a non-professional will not have so much immediate , objective efficiency ; but it will more greatly vitalize the striker , causing him to bring into play almost the whole of his body . 
The one is the blow of a boxer , the other that of a man . 
And it is notorious that the Hercules of the circus , the athletes of the ring , are not , as a rule , healthy . 
They knock out their opponents , they lift enormous weights , but they die of phthisis or dyspepsia . 
If a philosopher is not a man , he is anything but a philosopher ; he is above all a pedant , and a pedant is a caricature of a man . 
The cultivation of any branch of science -- of chemistry , of physics , of geometry , of philology -- may be a work of differentiated specialization , and even so only within very narrow limits and restrictions ; but philosophy , like poetry , is a work of integration and synthesis , or else it is merely pseudo-philosophical erudition . 
All knowledge has an ultimate object . 
Knowledge for the sake of knowledge is , say what you will , nothing but a dismal begging of the question . 
We learn something either for an immediate practical end , or in order to complete the rest of our knowledge . 
Even the knowledge that appears to us to be most theoretical -- that is to say , of least immediate application to the non-intellectual necessities of life -- answers to a necessity which is no less real because it is intellectual , to a reason of economy in thinking , to a principle of unity and continuity of consciousness . 
But just as a scientific fact has its finality in the rest of knowledge , so the philosophy that we would make our own has also its extrinsic object -- it refers to our whole destiny , to our attitude in face of life and the universe . 
And the most tragic problem of philosophy is to reconcile intellectual necessities with the necessities of the heart and the will . 
For it is on this rock that every philosophy that pretends to resolve the eternal and tragic contradiction , the basis of our existence , breaks to pieces . 
But do all men face this contradiction squarely ? 
Little can be hoped from a ruler , for example , who has not at some time or other been preoccupied , even if only confusedly , with the first beginning and the ultimate end of all things , and above all of man , with the `` why '' of his origin and the `` wherefore '' of his destiny . 
And this supreme preoccupation can not be purely rational , it must involve the heart . 
It is not enough to think about our destiny : it must be felt . 
And the would-be leader of men who affirms and proclaims that he pays no heed to the things of the spirit , is not worthy to lead them . 
By which I do not mean , of course , that any ready-made solution is to be required of him . 
Solution ? 
Is there indeed any ? 
So far as I am concerned , I will never willingly yield myself , nor entrust my confidence , to any popular leader who is not penetrated with the feeling that he who orders a people orders men , men of flesh and bone , men who are born , suffer , and , although they do not wish to die , die ; men who are ends in themselves , not merely means ; men who must be themselves and not others ; men , in fine , who seek that which we call happiness . 
It is inhuman , for example , to sacrifice one generation of men to the generation which follows , without having any feeling for the destiny of those who are sacrificed , without having any regard , not for their memory , not for their names , but for them themselves . 
All this talk of a man surviving in his children , or in his works , or in the universal consciousness , is but vague verbiage which satisfies only those who suffer from affective stupidity , and who , for the rest , may be persons of a certain cerebral distinction . 
For it is possible to possess great talent , or what we call great talent , and yet to be stupid as regards the feelings and even morally imbecile . 
There have been instances . 
These clever-witted , affectively stupid persons are wont to say that it is useless to seek to delve in the unknowable or to kick against the pricks . 
It is as if one should say to a man whose leg has had to be amputated that it does not help him at all to think about it . 
And we all lack something ; only some of us feel the lack and others do not . 
Or they pretend not to feel the lack , and then they are hypocrites . 
A pedant who beheld Solon weeping for the death of a son said to him , `` Why do you weep thus , if weeping avails nothing ? '' 
And the sage answered him , `` Precisely for that reason -- because it does not avail . '' 
It is manifest that weeping avails something , even if only the alleviation of distress ; but the deep sense of Solon 's reply to the impertinent questioner is plainly seen . 
And I am convinced that we should solve many things if we all went out into the streets and uncovered our griefs , which perhaps would prove to be but one sole common grief , and joined together in beweeping them and crying aloud to the heavens and calling upon God . 
And this , even though God should hear us not ; but He would hear us . 
The chiefest sanctity of a temple is that it is a place to which men go to weep in common . 
A miserere sung in common by a multitude tormented by destiny has as much value as a philosophy . 
It is not enough to cure the plague : we must learn to weep for it . 
Yes , we must learn to weep ! 
Perhaps that is the supreme wisdom . 
Why ? 
Ask Solon . 
There is something which , for lack of a better name , we will call the tragic sense of life , which carries with it a whole conception of life itself and of the universe , a whole philosophy more or less formulated , more or less conscious . 
And this sense may be possessed , and is possessed , not only by individual men but by whole peoples . 
And this sense does not so much flow from ideas as determine them , even though afterwards , as is manifest , these ideas react upon it and confirm it . 
Sometimes it may originate in a chance illness -- dyspepsia , for example ; but at other times it is constitutional . 
And it is useless to speak , as we shall see , of men who are healthy and men who are not healthy . 
Apart from the fact there is no normal standard of health , nobody has proved that man is necessarily cheerful by nature . 
And further , man , by the very fact of being man , of possessing consciousness , is , in comparison with the ass or the crab , a diseased animal . 
Consciousness is a disease . 
Among men of flesh and bone there have been typical examples of those who possess this tragic sense of life . 
I recall now Marcus Aurelius , St. Augustine , Pascal , Rousseau , René , Obermann , Thomson , -LSB- 9 -RSB- Leopardi , Vigny , Lenau , Kleist , Amiel , Quental , Kierkegaard -- men burdened with wisdom rather than with knowledge . 
And there are , I believe , peoples who possess this tragic sense of life also . 
It is to this that we must now turn our attention , beginning with this matter of health and disease . 
II . 
THE STARTING-POINT To some , perhaps , the foregoing reflections may seem to possess a certain morbid character . 
Morbid ? 
But what is disease precisely ? 
And what is health ? 
May not disease itself possibly be the essential condition of that which we call progress and progress itself a disease ? 
Who does not know the mythical tragedy of Paradise ? 
Therein dwelt our first parents in a state of perfect health and perfect innocence , and Jahwé gave them to eat of the tree of life and created all things for them ; but he commanded them not to taste of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . 
But they , tempted by the serpent -- Christ 's type of prudence -- tasted of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , and became subject to all diseases , and to death , which is their crown and consummation , and to labour and to progress . 
For progress , according to this legend , springs from original sin . 
And thus it was the curiosity of Eve , of woman , of her who is most thrall to the organic necessities of life and of the conservation of life , that occasioned the Fall and with the Fall the Redemption , and it was the Redemption that set our feet on the way to God and made it possible for us to attain to Him and to be in Him . 
Do you want another version of our origin ? 
Very well then . 
According to this account , man is , strictly speaking , merely a species of gorilla , orang-outang , chimpanzee , or the like , more or less hydrocephalous . 
Once on a time an anthropoid monkey had a diseased offspring -- diseased from the strictly animal or zoological point of view , really diseased ; and this disease , although a source of weakness , resulted in a positive gain in the struggle for survival . 
The only vertical mammal at last succeeded in standing erect -- man . 
The upright position freed him from the necessity of using his hands as means of support in walking ; he was able , therefore , to oppose the thumb to the other four fingers , to seize hold of objects and to fashion tools ; and it is well known that the hands are great promoters of the intelligence . 
This same position gave to the lungs , trachea , larynx , and mouth an aptness for the production of articulate speech , and speech is intelligence . 
Moreover , this position , causing the head to weigh vertically upon the trunk , facilitated its development and increase of weight , and the head is the seat of the mind . 
But as this necessitated greater strength and resistance in the bones of the pelvis than in those of species whose head and trunk rest upon all four extremities , the burden fell upon woman , the author of the Fall according to Genesis , of bringing forth larger-headed offspring through a harder framework of bone . 
And Jahwé condemned her , for having sinned , to bring forth her children in sorrow . 
The gorilla , the chimpanzee , the orang-outang , and their kind , must look upon man as a feeble and infirm animal , whose strange custom it is to store up his dead . 
Wherefore ? 
And this primary disease and all subsequent diseases -- are they not perhaps the capital element of progress ? 
Arthritis , for example , infects the blood and introduces into it scoriæ , a kind of refuse , of an imperfect organic combustion ; but may not this very impurity happen to make the blood more stimulative ? 
May not this impure blood promote a more active cerebration precisely because it is impure ? 
Water that is chemically pure is undrinkable . 
And may not also blood that is physiologically pure be unfit for the brain of the vertical mammal that has to live by thought ? 
The history of medicine , moreover , teaches us that progress consists not so much in expelling the germs of disease , or rather diseases themselves , as in accommodating them to our organism and so perhaps enriching it , in dissolving them in our blood . 
What but this is the meaning of vaccination and all the serums , and immunity from infection through lapse of time ? 
If this notion of absolute health were not an abstract category , something which does not strictly exist , we might say that a perfectly healthy man would be no longer a man , but an irrational animal . 
Irrational , because of the lack of some disease to set a spark to his reason . 
And this disease which gives us the appetite of knowing for the sole pleasure of knowing , for the delight of tasting of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil , is a real disease and a tragic one . 
Pantes anthrôpoi ton eidenai oregontai phusei , `` all men naturally desire to know . '' 
Thus Aristotle begins his Metaphysic , and it has been repeated a thousand times since then that curiosity or the desire to know , which according to Genesis led our first mother to sin , is the origin of knowledge . 
But it is necessary to distinguish here between the desire or appetite for knowing , apparently and at first sight for the love of knowledge itself , between the eagerness to taste of the fruit of the tree of knowledge , and the necessity of knowing for the sake of living . 
The latter , which gives us direct and immediate knowledge , and which in a certain sense might be called , if it does not seem too paradoxical , unconscious knowledge , is common both to men and animals , while that which distinguishes us from them is reflective knowledge , the knowing that we know . 
Man has debated at length and will continue to debate at length -- the world having been assigned as a theatre for his debates -- concerning the origin of knowledge ; but , apart from the question as to what the real truth about this origin may be , which we will leave until later , it is a certainly ascertained fact that in the apparential order of things , in the life of beings who are endowed with a certain more or less cloudy faculty of knowing and perceiving , or who at any rate appear to act as if they were so endowed , knowledge is exhibited to us as bound up with the necessity of living and of procuring the wherewithal to maintain life . 
It is a consequence of that very essence of being , which according to Spinoza consists in the effort to persist indefinitely in its own being . 
Speaking in terms in which concreteness verges upon grossness , it may be said that the brain , in so far as its function is concerned , depends upon the stomach . 
In beings which rank in the lowest scale of life , those actions which present the characteristics of will , those which appear to be connected with a more or less clear consciousness , are actions designed to procure nourishment for the being performing them . 
Such then is what we may call the historical origin of knowledge , whatever may be its origin from another point of view . 
Beings which appear to be endowed with perception , perceive in order to be able to live , and only perceive in so far as they require to do so in order to live . 
But perhaps this stored-up knowledge , the utility in which it had its origin being exhausted , has come to constitute a fund of knowledge far exceeding that required for the bare necessities of living . 
Thus we have , first , the necessity of knowing in order to live , and next , arising out of this , that other knowledge which we might call superfluous knowledge or knowledge de luxe , which may in its turn come to constitute a new necessity . 
Curiosity , the so-called innate desire of knowing , only awakes and becomes operative after the necessity of knowing for the sake of living is satisfied ; and although sometimes in the conditions under which the human race is actually living it may not so befall , but curiosity may prevail over necessity and knowledge over hunger , nevertheless the primordial fact is that curiosity sprang from the necessity of knowing in order to live , and this is the dead weight and gross matter carried in the matrix of science . 
Aspiring to be knowledge for the sake of knowledge , to know the truth for the sake of the truth itself , science is forced by the necessities of life to turn aside and put it itself at their service . 
While men believe themselves to be seeking truth for its own sake , they are in fact seeking life in truth . 
The variations of science depend upon the variations of human needs , and men of science are wont to work , willingly or unwillingly , wittingly or unwittingly , in the service of the powerful or in that of a people that demands from them the confirmation of its own desires . 
But is this really a dead weight that impedes the progress of science , or is it not rather its innermost redeeming essence ? 
It is in fact the latter , and it is a gross stupidity to presume to rebel against the very condition of life . 
Knowledge is employed in the service of the necessity of life and primarily in the service of the instinct of personal preservation . 
This necessity and this instinct have created in man the organs of knowledge and given them such capacity as they possess . 
Man sees , hears , touches , tastes , and smells that which it is necessary for him to see , hear , touch , taste , and smell in order to preserve his life . 
The decay or the loss of any of these senses increases the risks with which his life is environed , and if it increases them less in the state of society in which we are actually living , the reason is that some see , hear , touch , and smell for others . 
A blind man , by himself and without a guide , could not live long . 
Society is an additional sense ; it is the true common sense . 
Man , then , in his quality of an isolated individual , only sees , hears , touches , tastes , and smells in so far as is necessary for living and self-preservation . 
If he does not perceive colours below red or above violet , the reason perhaps is that the colours which he does perceive suffice for the purposes of self-preservation . 
And the senses themselves are simplifying apparati which eliminate from objective reality everything that it is not necessary to know in order to utilize objects for the purpose of preserving life . 
In complete darkness an animal , if it does not perish , ends by becoming blind . 
Parasites which live in the intestines of other animals upon the nutritive juices which they find ready prepared for them by these animals , as they do not need either to see or hear , do in fact neither see nor hear ; they simply adhere , a kind of receptive bag , to the being upon whom they live . 
For these parasites the visible and audible world does not exist . 
It is enough for them that the animals , in whose intestines they live , see and hear . 
Knowledge , then , is primarily at the service of the instinct of self-preservation , which is indeed , as we have said with Spinoza , its very essence . 
And thus it may be said that it is the instinct of self-preservation that makes perceptible for us the reality and truth of the world ; for it is this instinct that cuts out and separates that which exists for us from the unfathomable and illimitable region of the possible . 
In effect , that which has existence for us is precisely that which , in one way or another , we need to know in order to exist ourselves ; objective existence , as we know it , is a dependence of our own personal existence . 
And nobody can deny that there may not exist , and perhaps do exist , aspects of reality unknown to us , to-day at any rate , and perhaps unknowable , because they are in no way necessary to us for the preservation of our own actual existence . 
But man does not live alone ; he is not an isolated individual , but a member of society . 
There is not a little truth in the saying that the individual , like the atom , is an abstraction . 
Yes , the atom apart from the universe is as much an abstraction as the universe apart from the atom . 
And if the individual maintains his existence by the instinct of self-preservation , society owes its being and maintenance to the individual 's instinct of perpetuation . 
And from this instinct , or rather from society , springs reason . 
Reason , that which we call reason , reflex and reflective knowledge , the distinguishing mark of man , is a social product . 
It owes its origin , perhaps , to language . 
We think articulately -- i.e. , reflectively -- thanks to articulate language , and this language arose out of the need of communicating our thought to our neighbours . 
To think is to talk with oneself , and each one of us talks with himself , thanks to our having had to talk with one another . 
In everyday life it frequently happens that we hit upon an idea that we were seeking and succeed in giving it form -- that is to say , we obtain the idea , drawing it forth from the mist of dim perceptions which it represents , thanks to the efforts which we make to present it to others . 
Thought is inward language , and the inward language originates in the outward . 
Hence it results that reason is social and common . 
A fact pregnant with consequences , as we shall have occasion to see . 
Now if there is a reality which , in so far as we have knowledge of it , is the creation of the instinct of personal preservation and of the senses at the service of this instinct , must there not be another reality , not less real than the former , the creation , in so far as we have knowledge of it , of the instinct of perpetuation , the instinct of the species , and of the senses at the service of this instinct ? 
The instinct of preservation , hunger , is the foundation of the human individual ; the instinct of perpetuation , love , in its most rudimentary and physiological form , is the foundation of human society . 
And just as man knows that which he needs to know in order that he may preserve his existence , so society , or man in so far as he is a social being , knows that which he needs to know in order that he may perpetuate himself in society . 
There is a world , the sensible world , that is the child of hunger , and there is another world , the ideal world , that is the child of love . 
And just as there are senses employed in the service of the knowledge of the sensible world , so there are also senses , at present for the most part dormant , for social consciousness has scarcely awakened , employed in the service of the knowledge of the ideal world . 
And why must we deny objective reality to the creations of love , of the instinct of perpetuation , since we allow it to the creations of hunger or the instinct of preservation ? 
For if it be said that the former creations are only the creations of our imagination , without objective value , may it not equally be said of the latter that they are only the creations of our senses ? 
Who can assert that there is not an invisible and intangible world , perceived by the inward sense that lives in the service of the instinct of perpetuation ? 
Human society , as a society , possesses senses which the individual , but for his existence in society , would lack , just as the individual , man , who is in his turn a kind of society , possesses senses lacking in the cells of which he is composed . 
The blind cells of hearing , in their dim consciousness , must of necessity be unaware of the existence of the visible world , and if they should hear it spoken of they would perhaps deem it to be the arbitrary creation of the deaf cells of sight , while the latter in their turn would consider as illusion the audible world which the hearing cells create . 
We have remarked before that the parasites which live in the intestines of higher animals , feeding upon the nutritive juices which these animals supply , do not need either to see or hear , and therefore for them the visible and audible world does not exist . 
And if they possessed a certain degree of consciousness and took account of the fact that the animal at whose expense they live believed in a world of sight and hearing , they would perhaps deem such belief to be due merely to the extravagance of its imagination . 
And similarly there are social parasites , as Mr. A.J. Balfour admirably observes , -LSB- 10 -RSB- who , receiving from the society in which they live the motives of their moral conduct , deny that belief in God and the other life is a necessary foundation for good conduct and for a tolerable life , society having prepared for them the spiritual nutriment by which they live . 
An isolated individual can endure life and live it well and even heroically without in any sort believing either in the immortality of the soul or in God , but he lives the life of a spiritual parasite . 
What we call the sense of honour is , even in non-Christians , a Christian product . 
And I will say further , that if there exists in a man faith in God joined to a life of purity and moral elevation , it is not so much the believing in God that makes him good , as the being good , thanks to God , that makes him believe in Him . 
Goodness is the best source of spiritual clear-sightedness . 
I am well aware that it may be objected that all this talk of man creating the sensible world and love the ideal world , of the blind cells of hearing and the deaf cells of sight , of spiritual parasites , etc. , is merely metaphor . 
So it is , and I do not claim to discuss otherwise than by metaphor . 
And it is true that this social sense , the creature of love , the creator of language , of reason , and of the ideal world that springs from it , is at bottom nothing other than what we call fancy or imagination . 
Out of fancy springs reason . 
And if by imagination is understood a faculty which fashions images capriciously , I will ask : What is caprice ? 
And in any case the senses and reason are also fallible . 
We shall have to enquire what is this inner social faculty , the imagination which personalizes everything , and which , employed in the service of the instinct of perpetuation , reveals to us God and the immortality of the soul -- God being thus a social product . 
But this we will reserve till later . 
And now , why does man philosophize ? 
-- that is to say , why does he investigate the first causes and ultimate ends of things ? 
Why does he seek the disinterested truth ? 
For to say that all men have a natural tendency to know is true ; but wherefore ? 
Philosophers seek a theoretic or ideal starting-point for their human work , the work of philosophizing ; but they are not usually concerned to seek the practical and real starting-point , the purpose . 
What is the object in making philosophy , in thinking it and then expounding it to one 's fellows ? 
What does the philosopher seek in it and with it ? 
The truth for the truth 's own sake ? 
The truth , in order that we may subject our conduct to it and determine our spiritual attitude towards life and the universe comformably with it ? 
Philosophy is a product of the humanity of each philosopher , and each philosopher is a man of flesh and bone who addresses himself to other men of flesh and bone like himself . 
And , let him do what he will , he philosophizes not with the reason only , but with the will , with the feelings , with the flesh and with the bones , with the whole soul and the whole body . 
It is the man that philosophizes . 
I do not wish here to use the word `` I '' in connection with philosophizing , lest the impersonal `` I '' should be understood in place of the man that philosophizes ; for this concrete , circumscribed `` I , '' this `` I '' of flesh and bone , that suffers from tooth-ache and finds life insupportable if death is the annihilation of the personal consciousness , must not be confounded with that other counterfeit `` I , '' the theoretical `` I '' which Fichte smuggled into philosophy , nor yet with the Unique , also theoretical , of Max Stirner . 
It is better to say `` we , '' understanding , however , the `` we '' who are circumscribed in space . 
Knowledge for the sake of knowledge ! 
Truth for truth 's sake ! 
This is inhuman . 
And if we say that theoretical philosophy addresses itself to practical philosophy , truth to goodness , science to ethics , I will ask : And to what end is goodness ? 
Is it , perhaps , an end in itself ? 
Good is simply that which contributes to the preservation , perpetuation , and enrichment of consciousness . 
Goodness addresses itself to man , to the maintenance and perfection of human society which is composed of men . 
And to what end is this ? 
`` So act that your action may be a pattern to all men , '' Kant tells us . 
That is well , but wherefore ? 
We must needs seek for a wherefore . 
In the starting-point of all philosophy , in the real starting-point , the practical not the theoretical , there is a wherefore . 
The philosopher philosophizes for something more than for the sake of philosophizing . 
Primum vivere , deinde philosophari , says the old Latin adage ; and as the philosopher is a man before he is a philosopher , he must needs live before he can philosophize , and , in fact , he philosophizes in order to live . 
And usually he philosophizes either in order to resign himself to life , or to seek some finality in it , or to distract himself and forget his griefs , or for pastime and amusement . 
A good illustration of this last case is to be found in that terrible Athenian ironist , Socrates , of whom Xenophon relates in his Memorabilia that he discovered to Theodata , the courtesan , the wiles that she ought to make use of in order to lure lovers to her house so aptly , that she begged him to act as her companion in the chase , sunthêratês , her pimp , in a word . 
And philosophy is wont , in fact , not infrequently to convert itself into a kind of art of spiritual pimping . 
And sometimes into an opiate for lulling sorrows to sleep . 
I take at random a book of metaphysics , the first that comes to my hand , Time and Space , a Metaphysical Essay , by Shadworth H. Hodgson . 
I open it , and in the fifth paragraph of the first chapter of the first part I read : `` Metaphysics is , properly speaking , not a science but a philosophy -- that is , it is a science whose end is in itself , in the gratification and education of the minds which carry it on , not in external purpose , such as the founding of any art conducive to the welfare of life . '' 
